

 
 
 
 
Dak Guru 
A Self Learning Portal 
www.dakguru.com 
 
 
Consolidation of Products & 
Centralized Delivery Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: This booklet has been prepared strictly from an examination point of view. While every effort 
has  been  made  to  ensure  accuracy  and  the  inclusion  of  recent  changes,  amendments,  and  updates  to  the 
relevant Acts, Rules, and Regulations, this document is intended as a study aid only. Readers and students 
are  strongly  recommended  to  refer  to  official  government  sources  or  gazettes  for  the  most  reliable  and 
authoritative information. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 2   www.dakguru.com 
 
Guidelines of Directorate on Consolidation of Products 
Rationalization of Postal Products & Services 
The  Government  of  India  has  undertaken  an  exercise  to  rationalise  the  suite  of  postal 
products & services offered by the Department of Posts. As part of this exercise, keeping 
in view necessary legal requirements with respect to delivery of summons, notices, and 
other statutory documents, it is hereby notified that Registration, a value-added service, 
will now be available under the following revised framework, within the country. 
Revised Framework 
• Speed  Post: Speed  Post  Document  & Speed  Post  Parcel  shall  henceforth  be  the 
basic mail service for address-specific delivery of accountable postal items in the 
country. 
• Registration: Registration will be a value-added service for Speed Post items only 
and shall provide the addressee-specific delivery. 
• Exclusions: Registration will not be available for other categories of mail. 
          LEGISLATIVE NOTE: Merger of Registered Post service into Speed Post is effective 
w.e.f. 01.10.2025. 
Processing of Speed Post and Registered Articles at One Hub 
Bagging Protocol 
• Speed  Post  &  Registered: Only one  Speed  Post  bag with Orange  Color  label 
containing  Speed  Post  and  Registered  articles  will  be  sent  across  all  miles  (i.e., 
from Post Offices to the hubs, among the hubs, and hubs to the post offices). 
• Other  Articles: Presently  Domestic  Book  Packets,  Gyan  Post  (earlier  Registered 
Book  Packets  containing  printed  books),  Periodicals,  Registered  News  Paper, 
Registered  Newspaper  bundle,  Sample  Pattern  packet,  and  Blind  Literature 
having registration are also processed at hubs. Circles shall identify a separate area 
for such articles and process them accordingly. 
• Sorting  &  Routing: A  separate  sorting  diagram  shall  be  maintained  for  such 
articles. After processing, these articles shall be sent through surface routes only. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 3   www.dakguru.com 
 
• Labeling: These bags will be sent in Green Color Bag Label. 
Bag Closing Pattern in the Revised Network 
Post offices mapped with a National Sorting Hub (NSH) will send the following bags: 
1. TD  Bag  (Town  Delivery): Containing  Speed  Post  and  Registered  Articles  to  be 
delivered within the post offices mapped with the hub. 
2. NTD  Bag  (Non-Town  Delivery): Containing  the  articles  to  be  delivered  within 
the mapped post offices of other hubs. 
Station Articles: Delivery Post Offices shall keep the station articles (i.e., to be delivered 
in the delivery jurisdiction of the booking office itself) with them; there is no need to send 
such articles to the hub. 
Surface  Route  Articles: Apart  from  the  above, one  TD and one  NTD bag  containing 
Domestic  Book  Packets,  Gyan  Post,  Periodicals,  Registered  News  Paper,  Registered 
Newspaper bundle, Sample Pattern packet, and Blind Literature will also be prepared by 
the post offices for the hubs. These shall be dealt with by hubs separately through surface 
routes and closed in Green Color Bag Label. 
Post Office Mapped with the Intra-Circle Hub (ICH) 
Post Offices mapped with the ICH will close the following bags: 
• TD Bag: To the ICH containing the articles to be delivered among the post offices 
of the mapped ICHs and other ICHs and other NSHs within the Circle. 
• NTD Bag: To the NSHs containing the articles to be delivered in the mapped post 
offices of the mapped NSHs and post office of the hubs of other Circles. 
Closing of Bags from the Hubs 
• Speed  Post  &  Registered: A  single  bag  containing  Speed  Post  and  Registered 
articles to other hubs/mapped delivery offices will be sent in Orange Color label. 
• Surface  Articles: Domestic  Book  Packets,  Registered  Book  Packets  containing 
printed   books,   periodicals,   Registered   News   Paper,   Registered   Newspaper 
bundle, Sample Pattern packet, and Blind Literature shall be sent in a separate bag 
through surface route. These bags will be sent in Green Color Bag Label. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 4   www.dakguru.com 
 
• Transportation Mode: Hubs will process the domestic packets and close bags for 
the  destination  as  per  the  applicable  transport  mode  (Air/Surface). However,  it 
should  be  super  scribed  in  the  right-hand  corner  of  the  label,  i.e.,  either AIR or 
SURFACE. 
International Track Packets (ITPS) Bag Closing Pattern 
• PO mapped with ICHs: Will close direct separate bag directly to their NSHs only. 
• PO/IBCs (International Business Centers): To close direct bags for outward ITPS 
and  Registered/Insured  letter  post  articles  (letter,  small  packet,  blind  Literature, 
printed paper, M Bag) to mapped FPO/OE in case the daily average is 15 articles 
or 10 Kg mail per category. 
• NSH  Responsibility: In  respect  of  International  outward  category  of  mail,  all 
NSHs  shall  close  direct  bags  to  the  mapped  FPOs only for  Registered/Insured 
letter  post  items  and  ITPS  articles  and  dispatch  the  bags  through Air where  air 
connection is available. 
Compensation Guidelines for Speed Post 
The time limit for treating a Speed Post article as "lost" in the absence of  final delivery 
status for the purpose of payment of compensation is: 
• 60 days from the date of booking; OR 
• 30 days from the date of receipt of complaint. 
The compensation to the sender of a Speed  Post article so declared as lost will be  paid 
thereafter within a period of 10 days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 5   www.dakguru.com 
 
Centralized Delivery of All Types of Articles 
Integrated Delivery Centres 
Delivery Centres (DCs) with mechanization of all delivery areas can cater to the delivery 
of all types of articles i.e., Speed Post document, Registered Post, Parcels, ordinary mail, 
eMOs,  etc.  Mechanization  of  delivery  areas  will  ensure  coverage  of  large area  by  the 
delivery staff and will facilitate centralized delivery through the Delivery Centres. 
Delivery Centres with no counter operations and dedicated supervisory staff will ensure 
enhanced   monitoring   of   delivery   operations   which   will   contribute   to   overall 
improvement in the delivery services of the Department. 
Mechanization of delivery areas will also result in the enhanced delivery efficiency of the 
delivery  staff  with  considerable  reduction  in  the  travel  time.  Besides,  Delivery  Centres 
will  also  help  the  Department  in  implementing  Sunday/Holiday  delivery,  morning  or 
evening delivery as well as second delivery of mail as is the normal practice in the CEP 
(Courier, Express & Parcel Services) market. 
Integrated Delivery Centre: Document and Parcel Processing Area Co-located 
Document and parcel processing area in these Delivery Centres will be located adjacent 
to each other with common bag receipt and dispatch area. Delivery staff in these Delivery 
Centres may be assigned for delivery of documents and parcels as is indicated below: 
1. Separate  Delivery  Staff: Separate  delivery  staff  for  delivery  of  document  and 
parcels  may  be  assigned  subject  to  justification  for  separate  staff  for  parcel 
delivery, as is explained in subsequent paragraphs. 
2. Mix  Delivery  Staff: If  separate  delivery  staff  for  parcels  is  not justified,  then 
delivery staff will be assigned with both the document and parcel delivery in the 
delivery area. 
Delivery Centre with Separate Processing Areas 
Where processing areas for document and Parcel are separately located in a compound 
and not adjacent to each other: 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 6   www.dakguru.com 
 
• Document and parcel processing area in these Delivery Centres will not be located 
adjacent to each other and both the areas are at a distance from each other though 
in the same compound. 
• Separate area for Parcel processing will only be considered if there is justification 
for separate parcel delivery staff. 
• Bag receipt and dispatch area will be different for both the document and parcel 
processing area. 
• Separate delivery staff in these Delivery Centres will be assigned for delivery of 
documents and parcels. 
• In these instances, the document delivery centre will be called "Delivery Centre" 
and the Parcel delivery centre will be called "Nodal Delivery Centre". 
• Instructions issued by Parcel Directorate relating to setting up of Nodal Delivery 
Centres including layout design, number of delivery staff, etc., may be followed 
while setting up these Nodal Delivery Centres. 
 
Process Flow in Delivery Centre 
1. Integrated Delivery Centre (Separate Delivery Staff) 
Scenario: Document  and  Parcel  Processing  Area  located  adjacent  to  each  other  with 
Separate Delivery Staff for Document and Parcel. 
Common Steps: 
• Receipt of bag from MMS (Common Area) 
• Bag Receipt Scan (Common Area) 
 
 
 
 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 7   www.dakguru.com 
 
Specific Process Flow: 
Step Ordinary Mail Accountable Mail Parcels 
1 Opening of Bag Opening of Bag 
(Including Article 
Receipt Scan) 
Opening  of  Bag  (Including 
Article Receipt Scan & Sector 
Sorting) 
2 Segregation and 
facing   of   Ordinary 
Mail 
Sorting Delivery area wise Sorting 
3 Stamping of 
Ordinary Mail 
Sequencing Sequencing 
4 Sorting Scanning  of  articles  and 
generation    of    Delivery 
Slip 
Scanning    of    articles    and 
generation of Delivery Slip 
5 Sequencing Out of Delivery Out of Delivery 
6 Out of Delivery Taking  of  Delivery  Staff 
Return 
Taking    of    Delivery    Staff 
Return 
7 Taking   of   Delivery 
Staff Return 
Bag  Despatch  to  Sorting 
Hub 
Bag Despatch to Sorting Hub 
8 Bag Despatch to 
Sorting Hub 
Tallying of Abstract Tallying of Abstract 
9 Tallying of Abstract 
  
2. Integrated Delivery Centre (Mix Delivery Staff) 
Scenario: Integrated Delivery Centre with Mix Delivery Staff for Delivery of Document 
and Parcel. 
Common Steps: 
• Receipt of bag from MMS (Common Area) 
• Bag Receipt Scan (Common Area) 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 8   www.dakguru.com 
 
Specific Process Flow: 
Step Ordinary Mail Accountable Mail Parcels 
1 Opening of Bag Opening  of  Bag  (Including 
Article Receipt Scan) 
Opening  of  Bag  (Including 
Article    Receipt    Scan    & 
Sector Sorting) 
2 Segregation    and 
facing of 
Ordinary Mail 
Sorting Delivery area wise Sorting 
3 Stamping of 
Ordinary Mail 
Sequencing Sequencing 
4 Sorting Scanning    of    articles    and 
generation of Common 
Delivery  Slip for  Document 
and Parcel 
Scanning    of    articles    and 
generation of Common 
Delivery Slip for Document 
and Parcel 
5 Sequencing Out of Delivery Out of Delivery 
6 Out of Delivery Taking    of    Delivery    Staff 
Return 
Taking   of   Delivery   Staff 
Return 
7 Taking of 
Delivery Staff 
Return 
Bag Despatch to Sorting Hub Bag   Despatch   to   Sorting 
Hub 
8 Bag   Despatch   to 
Sorting Hub 
Tallying of Abstract Tallying of Abstract 
9 Tallying of 
Abstract 
  
3. Separately Located Processing Areas 
Scenario: Delivery Centre with processing areas for document and Parcel are separately 
located in the same compound and not adjacent to each other. 
 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 9   www.dakguru.com 
 
A. Document Processing Area 
Step Ordinary Mail Accountable Mail 
Receipt Receipt    of    Bags    from    MMS 
(Common Area) 
Receipt  of  Bags  from  MMS  (Common 
Area) 
Scan Bag Receipt Scan (Common Area) Bag Receipt Scan (Common Area) 
1 Opening of Bags Opening   of   Bags   (Including   Article 
Receipt Scan) 
2 Segregation and facing of 
Ordinary Mail 
Sorting 
3 Stamping of Ordinary Mail Sequencing 
4 Sorting Scanning  of  articles  and  generation  of 
Delivery Slip 
5 Sequencing Out of Delivery 
6 Out of Delivery Taking of Delivery Staff Return 
7 Taking of Delivery Staff Return Bag Despatch to Sorting Hub 
8 Bag Despatch to Sorting Hub Tallying of Abstract 
9 Tallying of Abstract 
 
B. Parcel Processing Area 
Step Parcels 
Receipt Receipt of Bags from MMS 
Scan Bag Receipt Scan 
1 Opening of Bag (Including Parcel Receipt Scan & Sector Sorting) 
2 Delivery area wise Sorting 
3 Sequencing 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 10   www.dakguru.com 
 
4 Scanning of articles and generation of Delivery Slip 
5 Out of Delivery 
6 Taking of Delivery Staff Return 
7 Bag Despatch to Sorting Hub 
8 Tallying of Abstract 
Scanning of Bags 
Supervisor or In-charge, Delivery Centre will ensure that bags are scanned at the time of 
actual receipt from mail motor as well as actual dispatch of bags through the mail motor. 
 
Guidelines for Setting up of Delivery Centres 
The  following  guidelines  may  be  followed  by  field  teams  while  setting  up  Delivery 
Centres for delivery of documents, parcels & other articles through Delivery Centre: 
Delivery Area or Delivery PIN codes 
• Merger: Delivery area of adjoining delivery Post offices may be merged under one 
Delivery Centre to be newly set up. 
• Redesign: Delivery  Beats  of  existing  delivery  POs  may  be  discontinued  and 
delivery area under new Delivery Centres may be redesigned or recalibrated by 
considering the overall delivery area of Delivery Centres. 
• Distance Limit: Delivery area may be so redesigned that one-way distance to be 
travelled by delivery staff should not be more than 15 km. However, in exceptional 
circumstances,  one-way  distance  to  be  travelled  by  delivery  staff  may  be  more 
than 15 km as per operational requirements. 
• Layout: 
o Layout  of  the  integrated  Delivery  Centre  with  document  and  parcel  area 
co-located may be designed as per the Model Layout. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 11   www.dakguru.com 
 
o Layout  for  Nodal  Delivery  Centre  as  provided  under Parcel  Design 
Manual as circulated  by Parcel Directorate may be referred for designing 
Parcel   area   wherever   Parcel   processing   area   is   not   co-located   with 
document processing area. 
Delivery of Parcels through Delivery Centres 
• As  far  as  possible,  delivery  of  parcels  should  be  performed  through  Delivery 
Centres  and  Parcel  processing  areas  should  be  identified  separately  in  Delivery 
Centres. 
• Existing  NDCs  already  functioning  in  a  city  may  be  merged  with  the  Delivery 
Centres either immediately or over a period of time, if immediate merger of NDC 
with Delivery Centres is not feasible. 
• New   NDCs   to   be   opened   by   the   Circle   under   these   instructions   due   to 
unavailability of suitable space may also be merged with Delivery Centres over a 
period of time. 
• Parcel delivery area with separate delivery staff may be separately carved out and 
may not be co-terminus with the document delivery area. Accordingly, separate 
delivery  staff  for  parcel  delivery  area  and  document  delivery  area  may  be 
identified. 
• Considering  the  parcel  volume  to  be  delivered  through  the  Delivery  Centre,  if 
separate parcel delivery staff is not justified, separate parcel delivery area need not 
be carved out and a common delivery staff may be assigned for both the delivery 
of document and parcels in the delivery area. 
• Parcel processing area in a Delivery Centre may be separately identified to ensure 
smooth  processing  of  document  and  parcels  irrespective  of  the  fact  whether 
separate parcel delivery staff is justified or not. 
Mechanized Delivery 
• All delivery areas within a delivery centre for delivery of document and Parcels 
should  be  mechanized  i.e.,  delivery  will  only  be  performed  through  either 2-
wheeler or through 4-wheeler for heavy parcels. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 12   www.dakguru.com 
 
• Documents and small  parcels will be delivered through 2-wheelers whereas big 
and heavy parcels will be delivered through 4-wheelers. 
• Fuel  Reimbursement: Fuel  re-imbursement  charges  to  delivery  staff  for  using 
their own 2-wheeler may be reimbursed on monthly basis as per policy guidelines 
issued by the Postal Directorate vide Letter No. 16-02/2024-D dated 25.11.2024. 
• Circle/Region/Postal Divisions may also hire electric 2-wheeler vehicles through a 
tendered process for making available the 2-wheeler vehicle to the delivery staff 
who do not have 2-wheeler vehicle. 
• 4-wheeler vehicles may be hired as per the existing practice. However, India Post 
branding on the hired 4-wheeler vehicle may be ensured. 
 
Workload Norms: Number of Articles 
Following  are  the  details  of  tentative  number  of  accountable,  unregistered  articles  and 
other  category  of  articles  which  will  be  normally  delivered  by  a  delivery  staff  under 
Delivery Centre (DC): 
Mix Delivery Area 
Tentative  number  of  articles  of  each  type  to  be  delivered  in  a  mix  delivery  area  by  a 
delivery staff are as detailed below: 
• Ordinary Articles: 95 
• Regd. Articles/Speed Post Person Specific/Parcels: 42 
• Speed Post (Document): 43 
• Money Order/eMO: 1 
• COD: 3 
• Insured: 1 
Note  1: These  calculations  of  articles  to  be  delivered  by  a  delivery  staff  are  arrived  at, 
after  assuming  distance  travelled  by  a  delivery  staff  as 30  km / 18  km in  less 
congested/congested area and travel time of 90 minutes. Actual number of articles of each 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 13   www.dakguru.com 
 
type to be delivered from a Delivery Centre may differ and same may be taken into the 
account. 
Note 2: While calculating number of delivery staff required in a Delivery Centre, articles 
to be delivered in Bulk should not be included. 
Exclusive Parcel Delivery Staff 
Parcels to be delivered by exclusive Parcel delivery staff are as detailed below: 
• Speed Post/Business/Regd. Parcel: 60 
Bulk Delivery 
1-2 bulk  delivery  staff  or  as  required  may  be  identified  exclusively  in  each  Delivery 
Centre (DC) for ensuring separate delivery of the bulk articles received for the addresses 
under the delivery area of Delivery Centre (DC). 
Number of Delivery Centre (DC) in a City 
Metro Cities / Other Big Cities 
• In   Metro   cities/other   big   cities   delivering   more   than 50,000 accountable 
articles/parcel  except bulk  per  day,  a  Delivery  Centre  (DC)  may  cater to  around 
50-80 delivery staff with corresponding number of articles to be delivered as per 
calculations indicated in Para above. Accordingly, the number of Delivery Centre 
(DC) to be set up in the metro city may be arrived at. 
• However, if sufficient space for Delivery Centre (DC) is available for catering more 
number of delivery staff, then this range of 50-80 delivery staff can be exceeded. 
• Maximum Limit: However, maximum number of accountable articles that can be 
delivered by a Delivery Centre (DC) may be kept at 8,000 articles per day except 
bulk articles. 
State Capital / Other Cities 
• In  the  case  of  State  Capital  or  other  cities,  a  Delivery  Centre  (DC)  may  cater  to 
around 15-60 delivery staff with corresponding number of articles to be delivered 
as per calculations indicated in above. Accordingly, the number of Delivery Centre 
(DC) to be set up in the city may be arrived at. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 14   www.dakguru.com 
 
• Maximum Limit: However, maximum number of accountable articles that can be 
delivered by a Delivery Centre (DC) may be kept at 5,000 articles per day except 
bulk articles. 
The number of delivery staff to be covered through a Delivery Centre may differ than the 
number of delivery staff as suggested above, considering the unique circumstances such 
as distance to be covered, geographical divide, availability of space, etc. 
 
Infrastructure and Facilities 
Space Requirement 
• Metro Cities: As indicated above, Delivery Centre (DC) in metro cities/other big 
cities will be created with around 50-80 delivery staff. It is estimated that an area 
of  around 2,000  to  3,500  Sq.  Ft. will  be  required  for  setting  up  an  integrated 
Delivery  Centre  (DC),  depending  upon  number  of  delivery  staff  catering  to  the 
delivery of documents and parcels. 
• State Capital/Other Cities: As indicated above, integrated Delivery Centre (DC) 
in State Capitals/other cities will be created with around 15-60 delivery staff. It is 
estimated that an area of around 1,000 to 2,500 Sq. Ft. will be required for setting 
up an integrated Delivery Centre (DC), depending upon number of delivery staff 
catering to the delivery of documents and parcels. 
• Parking: Besides,  while  selecting  a  location  for  setting  up  integrated  Delivery 
Centre (DC) in metro cities/other big cities or state capital/other cities, it must be 
ensured  that  the adequate  parking  space is  also  available  for  parking  of  two-
wheelers and four-wheeler vehicles to be engaged in the Delivery Centre (DC). 
Facility ID for Delivery Centre 
A Separate Facility ID may be created for each Delivery Centre as well as Nodal Delivery 
Centre, if applicable, to ensure creation of separate identity of the office in the CSI as well 
as to ensure the availability of monitoring data in the various BI/MIS reports. 
 
 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 15   www.dakguru.com 
 
Deployment of Staff 
Availability of 2-wheeler vehicle as well as smart mobile phone with the delivery staff 
must be ensured at the time of selection of Departmental staff/ GDS staff as delivery staff 
for Delivery Centre. 
PIN Code to be Used 
• Each Delivery Centre may be assigned the PIN code of any of the merged delivery 
post office, delivery areas of which will be served through the Delivery Centre. 
• However, ideally delivery PIN code of the major delivery PO may be assigned to 
the Delivery Centre. 
• CEPT  will  take  necessary  action  for  mapping  of  all  the  delivery  PIN  codes  to 
Delivery Centre's PIN code as well as necessary changes in BI/MIS reports. 
Standardization across Delivery Centre (DC) 
1. A ramp may   be   provided   on   the   entry   of   the   Delivery   Centre   for   the 
receipt/dispatch of the bags through the Bag trolley. 
2. Each area in the Delivery Centre i.e., Bag receipt area, bag open area, etc. may be 
marked as per defined process flow. 
 
Operational Guidelines 
Delivery Slips 
• A common Delivery Slip will be generated in the case of "Mix Delivery Area" i.e., 
delivery slip will contain Speed Post document, Registered Post as well as Parcels. 
• However,  in  the  case  of  separate  Parcel  Area,  delivery  slip  for  document  and 
Parcels will be generated separately. 
• Bulk Delivery Slip: Supervisor/Incharge, Delivery Centre will ensure that a Bulk 
Delivery  Slip  will  be  generated  for  the  articles  to  be  delivered  in  bulk  by  the 
Delivery staff. 
 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 16   www.dakguru.com 
 
Postman Mobile App (PMA) 
• All  the  delivery  staff  under  the  Delivery  Centre  will  be  equipped  with  mobile 
phones either Departmental or mobile devices covered under the Scheme "Bring 
Your  Own  Device  (BYOD)".  Availability  of  PMA  with  the  delivery  staff  will  be 
ensured at the time of selection of delivery staff for Delivery Centre. 
• Advance  tech  related  functionalities  will  be  introduced  in  PMA  under  IT  2.0 
project  i.e.,  route  optimization,  paperless  delivery,  OTP  based  delivery,  digital 
collection of payment, App based calling to addressee, etc. as is the norm in the 
CEP industry, to further upgrade the PMA App. 
Call to Customer 
Delivery staff will make a call to the addressee before visiting the address for making the 
delivery to ensure expediting delivery of the articles. 
Delivery of eMO / COD / Custom Duty Articles 
• Delivery  staff  will  collect  the  required  cash  for  the  delivery  of  the  Money 
order/eMO from the designated official in the Delivery Centre. 
• Besides,  delivery  staff  after  delivery  of  COD/Custom  duty  Articles/undelivered 
eMO will submit the cash, collected from the addresses to the designated official. 
• Amount  collected digitally by  the  delivery  staff  from  the  addresses  towards 
COD/Custom duty Articles will be settled automatically and accounted for by the 
designated official. 
Equipment to be used in Delivery Centre (DC) 
Following operational equipment as is indicated below may be provided in the integrated 
Delivery Centre (DC): 
1. Computers   and   scanners may   be   supplied   as   per   the   existing   prescribed 
specifications. 
2. Document Processing Area: 
o (a) Opening table for ordinary mail 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 17   www.dakguru.com 
 
o (b) Sorting case 
o (c) Roller Containers 
o (d) Stamping Table 
o (e) Postman Table 
3. Parcel Processing Area: 
o (a) Opening Table 
o (b) Sequencing Table 
o (c) Package Trolley 
o (d) Roller Containers 
o (e) Standardized delivery bags 
o (f) Standardized delivery bag 
Treasury Function 
Each Delivery Centre having separate facility ID may be provided with treasury function 
to ensure disbursement of cash to the delivery staff for payment of money order, etc. as 
well  as  receipt  of  cash  collected  towards  delivery  of  COD,  custom  duty,  undelivered 
money order, etc. 
Number of Delivery Re-attempts 
• Two delivery  attempts  may  be  made  for  documents  or  parcels  and  undelivered 
articles may be kept in deposit for maximum of 7 days. 
• Besides, existing instructions regarding serving of intimation to the addressee may 
be strictly followed. 
Number of Shifts / Second Delivery 
• A  Normal  Delivery  Centre  (DC)  will  carry  out  delivery  work  as  per  normal 
delivery timing wherein duty hour of delivery staff to be fixed from 09.00 hrs to 
17.00 hrs. The timing may be altered depending upon the local factors or location 
of Delivery Centre. 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 18   www.dakguru.com 
 
• However, considering the growing delivery volume as well as requirement from 
the customers, second delivery services from the Delivery Centre may be started 
as per the requirements. 
• Under the second delivery, a delivery facility is used for performing two deliveries 
in  a  day  i.e.,  Morning  delivery  and  evening  delivery  (as  is  the  practice  in  RMS 
offices) and can cater to the delivery of twice number of articles, to be delivered 
through a single delivery centre. 
Field Units Guidelines for Second Delivery: 
1. Duty Timing: Timing for the morning delivery or First Delivery may be kept from 
09.00 hrs to 17.00 hrs and timing for evening delivery or Second Delivery may be 
kept from 12.00 hrs to 20.00 hrs. 
2. Facility  ID: A  separate  Facility  ID  will  be  created  for  the  Delivery  Centre 
functioning in morning shift and evening shift to ensure separate identity of both 
the Delivery Centres. 
3. Supervisor & Delivery PA: Separate Supervisors as well as delivery PAs may be 
provided  for  First  delivery  and  Second  Delivery  Set.  Separate  Supervisor  & 
Delivery PA will also be provided for Nodal Delivery Centre (Parcel area not co-
located with document area) to be set up under these guidelines. 
Sunday / Holiday Delivery 
• Each Delivery Centre will perform delivery of the articles on Sunday and public 
holidays as per requirement. 
• However, delivery staff serving office areas may not be operationalized on Sunday 
and public holidays. 
• Besides,  duties  of  Departmental  or  GDS  delivery  staff  may  be  fixed  in  such  a 
manner, to ensure a weekly off to each of such delivery staff. 
Provision of CCTV 
Each Delivery Centre will be covered under the CCTV in such a way to ensure coverage 
of outside of the Delivery Centre including bag exchange area with mail motor service 

 Dak Guru                                        Consolidation of Products & Centralized Delivery Policy 
 19   www.dakguru.com 
 
and processing areas inside the Delivery Centre. An SOP for installation of CCTVs, issued 
by the Department on 25th February, 2021. 
Access Control 
Supervisor/Incharge,  Delivery  Centre  may  ensure  the  entry  of only  authorized  staff 
inside the Delivery Centre. Entry of outside person inside the Delivery Centre may not 
be permitted. 
 
 