

 
 
 
 
 
 
A Self Learning Portal 
 
 
 
THE PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
(with recent amendments/changes upto 31.12.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER: This  booklet  has  been  prepared  strictly  from  an  examination point  of  view.  While 
every effort has been made to ensure accuracy and the inclusion of recent changes, amendments, and 
updates to the relevant Acts, Rules, and Regulations, this document is intended as a study aid only. 
Readers and students are strongly recommended to refer to official government sources or gazettes for 
the most reliable and authoritative information. 
www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 2 www.dakguru.com 
 
Parent Act: Post Office Act, 2023 (Act No. 43 of 2023). 
Notification Date: December 16, 2024. 
Structure: 15 Chapters, 180 Regulations, 5 Schedules. 
THE POST OFFICE REGULATIONS, 2024  
The Post Office Regulations, 2024 were notified vide Notification  No. S.O. 5440(E) dated 16th 
December,  2024,  exercising  powers  under Section  13 of  the Post  Office  Act,  2023.  These 
regulations supersede previous rules where applicable. 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
(1) These regulations may be called the Post Office Regulations, 2024. 
(2) They shall come in to force on the 16th day of December, 2024. 
2. Definitions. 
(1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) "accountable items" means such items that provide a receipt at the time of booking for track 
and trace (stage wise electronic data on movement of item) and require the signature (in ink or 
digital) of the addressee, the payee, or their authorised person upon receipt of an item, to provide 
evidence  of  delivery  and  include  items  such  as  India  Post  Parcel,  Speed  Post,  Magazine  Post, 
International Speed Post Services (EMS), International Air Parcels, International Tracked Packets, 
International  Registered  Letter  items,  Money  Order  and  items  with  value  added  services  like 
registration, insurance and cash on delivery (COD); 
(b) "Act" means the Post Office Act, 2023 (43 of 2023); 
(c) "addressee" means the intended recipient or the person to whom any item is to be delivered; 
(d)  "administrative  instructions"  means  the  executive  or  administrative  orders  or  instructions 
including  guidelines  issued  by  the  Central  Government  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  Director 
General as specified under regulation 178 or regulation 179 or regulation 180, as the case may be; 
(e) "authorised person" means a person, duly authorised by the addressee to receive the item or 
by a payee to receive the money on his behalf; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 3 www.dakguru.com 
 
(f) "delivery" means the delivery of an item at the address of the addressee, or to the addressee or 
other person or location considered to be authorised to receive the item according to the usual 
manner of delivering items to the addressee; 
(g) "Director (Postal Services)" means the Director in any administrative office of the Post Office 
or an officer exercising the powers of Director (Postal Services); 
(h) "in course of transmission by post" means the period starting from receipt of an item by the 
post office to its delivery to the addressee or return to the sender or otherwise disposed of; 
(i) "letter box" means a box installed in post offices or mail offices or at public places, for posting 
of fully prepaid letters, postcards, letter cards and book post items; 
(j) "payee" means the person who intends to receive money through money remittance services; 
(k) "post" means any system for collection, clearance, sorting, dispatch, conveyance, and delivery 
of items by the postal network; 
(l)  "Postmaster"  means  the  Director  or  Chief  Postmaster  of  general  post  office,  or  Senior 
Postmaster  or  Head  Postmaster  of  head  post  office,  or  an  officer  exercising  the  powers  of 
Postmaster, as the case may be, who is the head of such post office; 
(m) "redirection" means action of assigning or directing an item to an address, other than the one 
to which it was initially addressed, for a specific reason; 
(n) "remitter" means the person who remits money through money remittance services; 
(o) "rules" means the Post Office Rules, 2024 and the expression  "rule" shall mean a rule of the 
said rules; 
(p) "schedule" means the schedule annexed to these regulations; 
(q) "sender" means a person who sends any item; and 
(r) "weight" means gross weight or volumetric weight, whichever is higher, except when stated 
otherwise. 
 
 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 4 www.dakguru.com 
 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL 
3. Business hours. 
(1) The business hours in a post office, during which business is transacted with the public, shall 
generally  be  as  under  on  normal  weekdays,  which  are  not  holidays  for  the  Post  Office  or  the 
Government holidays, namely: - 
Sl. 
No. 
Work Business Hours 
(i) For references and enquiries 
During the entire working 
hours of the office 
(ii) 
Counter services including booking and posting of 
items, premium collection of insurance premiums 
Six hours 
(iii) 
Money remittance- Electronic Money Order, Indian 
Postal Order etc. 
Six hours 
(iv) Savings Bank Six hours 
 
(2) Branch post offices shall be kept open for a maximum period of five hours in a day. 
4. (1) The Circle Head, Regional Head and Divisional Head are empowered to specify the period 
of each of the post offices under their jurisdiction, during which business is transacted with the 
public or customer and the time at which items are delivered and dispatched, keeping in view, 
the maximum working hours, business hours, local convenience and the arrival and departure 
timings of the items and working of the post office counters. 
(2) The Circle Head or Regional Head may, if it is necessary or expedient to meet the requirement 
of the public, or in any special circumstances, specify- 
(a) the business hours and the days other than the working days including Sundays and holidays, 
during which the post offices shall be opened for business; 
(b) the kind of transactions available during such business hours; and 
(c)  the  maximum  number of items  that  may  be  tendered for  booking  during  business hours to 
meet the rush of work in a post office and to ensure the equitable availability of facilities to the 
public. 
5. Payment of postage and other sums chargeable on items. 
(1) Postage shall generally be paid by modes mentioned in rule 9. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 5 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2) The pre-payment of postage and other sums payable on an item shall be mandatory except 
otherwise mentioned in these regulations. 
6. Postage on unaccountable items and unpaid items. 
(1) If the postage required on unaccountable items, which have embossed postage on it, is more 
than  the  value  of  the  stamp  printed  on  them,  the  difference  shall  be  made  good  by  affixing 
additional postage stamps of the requisite value. 
(2) Unpaid or insufficiently paid items are liable to be kept on hold for charging the postage due 
on them. 
7. Postage and chargeable sums not deemed to be prepaid. 
The postage and other sums chargeable on an item shall not be deemed to be prepaid by means 
of a proper stamp or franking impression or point of sale receipt if- 
(a) the stamp or impression of a stamp or impression which has not been provided for use as a 
postage stamp or franking impression or point of sale receipt under these regulations or rules; 
(b) the stamp has been obliterated, defaced, torn, cut or otherwise rendered imperfect; 
(c) the stamp or franking impression or point of sale receipt has upon it, any word, letter, figure 
or design, printed or impressed upon it, otherwise than by the Director General before posting; 
or 
(d)  the  stamp  has  been  cut,  or  otherwise,  separated  from  an  embossed  envelope,  or  from  a 
postcard or wrapper: 
Provided  that  nothing  in  this  regulation  shall  prevent  the  perforation  of  postage  stamps  with 
initials, or other identifying marks, traced in minute holes: 
Provided further that nothing in this regulation shall prevent the transmission of Book Now Pay 
Later (BNPL) items or other items as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
8. Supply of postage stamps. 
(1) The operational guidelines for supply, custody and sale of postage stamps, shall be specified 
by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2) No person or entity or institution or organisation or electronic platform shall sell or distribute 
postage stamps or deal in any other manner in postage stamps, except with the prior permission 
of the Director General. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 6 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-regulation (2) above or any term or condition of 
permission issued thereunder shall be punishable under the relevant provisions of the applicable 
law of the land for the time being in force. 
9. Fraudulent usage of stamp. 
(1) The act of usage of previously used postage stamp, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss 
to the Government, shall be punishable under the applicable law of the land for the time being in 
force. 
(2) If such postage stamp is detected on an item already posted, the item shall not be delivered 
and dealt with in a manner as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
10. Illegal manufacture or usage of postage stamps. 
(1)  The  illegal  manufacturing  and  usage  of  the  postage  stamp  such  as  forged,  counterfeit,  or 
fictitious postage stamps shall  be punishable under  the  applicable  law of  the land for  the  time 
being in force. 
(2)  Reproduction  of  stamps  shall  only  be  allowed  for  illustration  purposes  in  a  philatelic 
publication,  or  in  an  item  or  section  relating  wholly  to  postage  stamps  that  may  appear  in  a 
publication or a general character, and such reproductions shall only be in such form as may be 
specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
11. Philately. 
(1) Philately is a study and collection of stamps, postal stationery, postmarks and other philatelic 
materials. 
(2)  The  operational  procedures  related  with  the philately  shall  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
12. Philatelic materials. 
(1)  Philatelic  materials  shall  be  issued  by  the  Post  Office  as  per  administrative  instructions 
specified from time to time. 
(2) Philatelic materials include 
(a) philatelic stamps; 
(b) first day covers, brochures or information sheets, special covers, maxim cards, annual packs, 
postal stationeries and various Philatelic publications and ancillaries; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 7 www.dakguru.com 
 
(c) artworks, proofs, progressive sheets, printed sheets and printing plates of philatelic stamps; 
and 
(d) postmarks, slogan dies and other artifacts used in connection with the production of philatelic 
stamps. 
(3) The Director General shall specify by administrative instructions the philatelic material to be 
sold in post offices. 
(4) All the activities corresponding to production and issue of philatelic materials shall be carried 
out as per administrative instructions issued from time to time. 
13. Issuance of postage stamps. 
The postage stamps shall be issued in the following types, namely:- 
(a) Definitive Stamps: Definitive Stamps are postage stamps, specifically issued to meet the day-
to-day postage needs and are made available for sale for a period till stocks of a particular series 
last, which shall be printed and reprinted in different denominations as per the requirement of 
the post office. 
(b) Commemorative Stamps: 
(i)  Commemorative  Stamps  are  postage  stamps  issued  to  commemorate  an  event,  institution, 
theme and personages, which shall be printed only once, in limited numbers and are sold for a 
limited  period,  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative  instructions  from  time  to  time,  through 
philatelic bureaus, philatelic counters, online channels or authorised offices. 
(ii) The Commemorative Stamps may be kept as collectible items and may be used for payment 
of postage. 
(c)  Special  Stamps:  Special  Stamps  are  postage  stamps  which  are  thematic  like  flora,  fauna, 
architecture or art without commemorating any specific event. 
(d) Joint Issue Stamps: Joint Issue Stamps are postage stamps which are issued by India and any 
other country on mutually agreed terms and conditions. 
(e)  My  Stamps:  My  Stamps  are  such  stamps  which  are  issued  on  the  basis  of  personalised  or 
customised  printing  elements  provided  by  the  customer or  proponent, subject  to  confirmation 
with administrative instructions specified from time to time. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 8 www.dakguru.com 
 
14. (1) Issuance of Commemorative Postage Stamp. Any citizen of India may tender a proposal 
for issue of Commemorative Postage Stamp in accordance with the administrative instructions 
specified from time to time. 
(2) All such proposals shall be examined on the basis of the administrative instructions specified 
by the Central Government from time to time. 
(3)  Proponents  for  issue  of  a  commemorative  stamp  relating  to  institutions  or  events  or 
organisations are required to make a mandatory purchase of number of such stamps as specified 
by  administrative  instructions  from  time  to  time:  Provided  that  in  exceptional  and  deserving 
cases, Central Government may relax this condition. 
(4) The denominations of postage stamps shall be in consonance with domestic and international 
postal postage. 
(5) No postage stamp shall be issued on a living personality. 
(6) Stamp design and denomination shall be as approved by the Central Government. 
(7) All philatelic stamps, brochures, first day covers and philatelic ancillaries shall be sold by the 
Post  Office on  the  denoted  value or on the  value specified  by  administrative  instructions from 
time to time. 
15. Philatelic Advisory Committee. 
(1)  The  Philatelic  Advisory  Committee  shall  advise  on  the  issue  of  Commemorative  Stamps, 
Special Stamps, and other allied matters related thereto. 
(2)  The  Union  Minister-in-Charge  of  the  Ministry  of  Communications  shall  be  the  ex  officio 
Chairperson of the Philatelic Advisory Committee and shall nominate the official and non-official 
members of the Committee as per the administrative instructions specified from time to time. 
16. Manner of affixing postage stamps. 
(1) Stamps affixed to an item must be completely adherent to the item itself and not to any part 
of its contents or any separate label or other device tied or attached to the item. 
(2) The stamps should be affixed to the right-hand top corner of the address side. 
(3) The provisions of this regulation shall apply to franking of items in toto. 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 9 www.dakguru.com 
 
17. Price of postage stamps and stationery. 
(1) Postage stamps, postcards, letter card and aerogramme shall be sold for the denoted value of 
the stamps which they bear. 
(2) The embossed envelopes and the registration envelopes shall be sold at the prices mentioned 
in Table VII of Schedule I. 
(3)  Special  Rakhi  Envelopes  shall  be  sold  at  the  prices  as  the  Circle  Head  concerned  may 
determine. 
18. Standards for addressing on domestic items. 
(1) An item shall not have more than one delivery address; 
Provided  that  nothing  in  this  sub-regulation  shall  prevent  the  delivery  of  an  item  to  another 
address as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2) The address, either handwritten or machine printed, shall contain such elements and, in such 
order, as given below: - 
 Name 
 C/o, D/o, S/o, W/o, H/o Mobile Number (optional) 
 House/ Building (including floor)/ Apartment (including floor) 
 Street /Road /Lane Landmark 
 Area / Locality/ Sector Village/Town/City 
 Post Office District State 
 PIN code/Postcode 
 
(3) The address of the addressee shall be written in the centre of the front side and address of the 
sender shall be written on the lower left of the front side of an envelope. 
(4) Address of the addressee and the sender should be started from the words "To" and "From", 
respectively. 
(5) Blank space of minimum 15mm shall be kept from left, bottom and right side of envelope and 
the address block of addressee shall have minimum gap of 40 mm from top. 
(6) Stamps or Frank impressions shall be affixed in maximum area of 74 mm on the upper right 
corner. 
(7)  The  address  of  addressee  and  sender  should  be  positioned  parallel  to  the  length  of  the 
envelope. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 10 www.dakguru.com 
 
(8) A zone of 10mm around the address block should be free from any printing or writing. 
(9)   Non-address  information  such   as  sender's   code,   serial  or   account   numbers  or  other 
information are not to be generally included in the address of the addressee and if necessary, it 
should be printed above the first line but never below the last line of the address. 
(10) The spacing between the address lines shall be uniform and be more than 1mm and less than 
5mm. 
(11)  The  maximum  number  of  characters  per  line  is  40  characters,  excluding  spaces  between 
words. 
(12) An accountable item tendered at a post office for transmission shall not be accepted unless 
they are addressed to a particular person or firm or institution. 
(13)  Such  items  addressed to  a particular  person or  firm, care of post  box  and  the name of  the 
office where the post box is located shall also be accepted, provided they are addressed to persons 
or firms in whose names the post box stands registered; 
Provided that in the office of delivery, if it is found that there is no post box in the name of the 
addressee, or the addressee has ceased to be a renter of a post box, the item shall be returned to 
the sender. 
19. Mails for defence services personnel. 
The following particulars shall be furnished in the address in the case of items for the personnel 
of the defence services, which are to be delivered through the army post offices: - 
 No. Rank Name Unit 
 Such items should be addressed to Care of (C/o) 56 A.P.O. or Care of (C/o) 99 A.P.O. 
20. Exemption in method of addressing of an item in certain cases. 
"Any  item,  addressed  to  the  CVC  as  well  as CVOs,  posted  with  the  superscription  'Complaint 
under the Public Interest Disclosure" or "PIDPI Complaint" on the outside of the envelope of the 
item, may be accepted for transmission by post, without the name and complete address of the 
sender. 
Note: "PIDPI"  shall be entered against the name and address field of the sender at the time of 
booking of items through the software (system). 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 11 www.dakguru.com 
 
21. Standards for addressing on international items. 
(1) An item shall not have more than one delivery address: 
Provided  that  nothing  in  this  sub-regulation  shall  prevent  the  delivery  of  an  item  to  another 
address as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2) The address, either handwritten or machine printed, shall be worded in a precise, complete 
and legible manner to ensure the easy transmission of the item and its delivery at the country or 
territory of destination to the addressee. 
(3) The address of the sender and the addressee must be written in roman letters and in Arabic 
numerals,  and  wherever  required,  the  address  of  the  addressee  may  also  be  written  in  the 
language of country or territory of destination. 
(4) The name of the place of destination and the country or territory of destination shall be written 
in capital letters together with the correct postcode number or delivery zone number, whichever 
applicable. 
(5) The address of the sender and addressee shall contain such elements, whichever applicable, 
and, in such order, as given below, unless otherwise specified: - 
 Name 
 Mobile Number (optional) 
 Building (door, floor, stairwell, wing, building, distinct instances) 
 Street (street name/number/type, primary thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare) 
 PO Box 
 Post Office 
 City/town/Rural Area Administrative Areas (region level) 
 Postcode Country/Territory 
 
(6) The address of the addressee shall be written on right of front side and address of the sender 
shall be written on lower left of front side on an envelope. 
(7)  The  address  of  the  addressee  and  the  sender  should  be  started  from  the  words  "To"  and 
"From", respectively. 
(8) Blank space of minimum 15mm shall be kept from left, bottom and right side of envelope and 
the address block of addressee shall have minimum gap of 40 mm from top. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 12 www.dakguru.com 
 
Stamps  or  Frank  impressions  shall  be  affixed  in  maximum  area  of  74  mm  on  the  upper  right 
corner. 
(9) A zone of 10mm around the address block should be free from any printing or writing. 
(10)  Non-address  information  such  as  sender's  code,  serial  or  account  numbers  or  other 
information are not to be generally included in the address of the addressee and if necessary, it 
should be printed above the first line but never below the last line of the address. 
(11) The spacing between the address lines shall be uniform and be more than 1mm and less than 
5mm. 
(12)  The  maximum  number  of  characters  per  line  is  40  characters,  excluding  spaces  between 
words. 
(13) An accountable item tendered at a post office for transmission shall not be accepted unless 
they are addressed as per regulations 18, 19 and sub-regulation (5). 
22. Posting of items. 
The following modes may be used for posting of items: - 
(a) Letter Boxes - Letters, letter cards, aerogramme, postcards, airmail postcards, book post, small 
packets, printed papers and literature for the blind, shall be posted in the letter boxes, provided 
the postage chargeable is fully prepaid. 
 Note 1: Registered newspaper items, periodical post items and franked items shall not be 
posted in these letter boxes and, if posted, these shall be treated as unpaid and shall be 
dealt as per regulation 71. 
 Note 2: Accountable items shall also not be posted in the letter boxes. 
 Note 3: Large items, which owing to their size cannot be posted in the letter-boxes, may 
be received by hand at the window of the post office. However, such items shall not be 
deemed to be accountable items. 
(b) Post office counter - All the accountable items shall be presented at the counter of post office 
for transmission by post. 
(c) Franchisee Outlet - Items as specified by administrative instructions from time to time, may 
be presented through the franchisee outlet of the Post Office. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 13 www.dakguru.com 
 
(d) Self-Booking Kiosk - Self-booking kiosk available at the designated post offices may be used 
for posting of items as may be specified by administrative instructions. 
 Note: The Regional Head is authorised to designate the post offices, where the service of 
self-booking kiosk is available. 
(e) Web or Mobile Application - The authorised web portal or mobile application may be used 
for posting of items as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
23. Receipt for transmission by post. 
A receipt shall be given to the person who presents an accountable item for transmission by post. 
24. Ownership of items. 
(1) For domestic items, an item shall remain the property of the sender until it is delivered to the 
rightful addressee, except in the case of seizure of the item under the applicable law of the land 
for the time being in force. 
(2) For international items, an item shall remain the property of the sender until it is delivered to 
the rightful addressee, except in the case of seizure of the item under any law of the land of the 
country or territory of origin or transit or destination. 
25. Prohibition of domestic items. 
(1) Subject to the provisions of these regulations, no person shall send by post, - 
(a) any explosive, dangerous, filthy, noxious or deleterious substance, any sharp instrument not 
properly  protected,  or  any  living  creature  which  is  either  noxious  or  likely  to  injure  items  in 
course of transmission by post or any officer of the Post Office; or 
(b)  anything  likely  to  injure,  any  item  during  transmission  by  post,  or  any  officer  of  the  Post 
Office; or 
(c) any ticket, proposal, advertisement or any other matter relating to a lottery, except the case 
where the lottery is organised or authorised by the Central Government or State Government; or 
(d) any indecent, immoral or obscene printing, painting, photograph, lithograph, engraving, book 
or card, or any other digital media, or any other indecent, immoral, or obscene item; or 
(e) any item having thereon, or on the cover thereof, any words, marks or designs of an indecent, 
obscene, seditious, scurrilous, threatening or grossly offensive character; or 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 14 www.dakguru.com 
 
(f)  any  item  having  thereon,  or  on  the  cover  thereof,  any  matter  which  is  prejudicial  to  the 
maintenance of law and order; or 
(g) any item having thereon, or on the cover thereof, any pictorial representation of a person who 
is  a  proclaimed  offender,  or  who  has  been  convicted  of  an  offence  punishable  under  any 
applicable law of the land for the time being in force; or 
(h)  any  item  having  thereon,  or  on  the  cover  thereof,  anything  written,  printed,  or  otherwise 
impressed upon or attached to its address side, which, either on account of its being likely to be 
mistaken for stamps used for the payment of postage or by inconvenient proximity to any such 
stamp or by tending to prevent the easy and quick reading of the address; or 
(i)  narcotics  and  psychotropic  substances,  as  defined  by  the  International Narcotics  Control 
Board, or other  illicit drugs  which are prohibited in  the country or  territory of  destination,  the 
country  or  territory  of  origin,  the  Central  Government,  State  Governments,  or  any  authorised 
agency; or 
(j) counterfeit and pirated items; or 
(k) anything which, by their nature or their packing, may expose officials or the general public to 
danger, or soil or damage other items, postal equipment, or third party property; or 
(l)  dangerous  goods,  narcotics  and  psychotropic  substances,  prohibited  drugs  and  cosmetics 
items, items prohibited by or under International Air Transport Association (IATA), International 
Civil Aviation  Organisation  (ICAO),  Department of  Wildlife  and  the Drug  and  Cosmetics Act, 
1940 (23 of 1940) or items prohibited by any law of the land; or 
 Explanation.- For   the   purpose  of   this   clause,   "dangerous   goods"   means  items  or 
substances  that  are  capable of  posing a  risk  to health, safety,  property or  environment, 
which  include  explosives,  gases,  flammable  liquids,  toxic  and  infectious  substances, 
corrosives and other miscellaneous items which may cause health and safety hazards: 
 Provided  that  battery  and other items,  the  transmission of  which,  by  air, is prohibited, 
shall be sent to the addressee through surface mode only; or 
(m) live animals except otherwise permitted in these regulations; or 
(n) coins, banknotes and other valuable items, except permitted through a special process: 
Provided that the order shall be in consonance with Reserve Bank of India guidelines, Foreign 
Exchange  Management  (Export  and  Import  of  Currency)  Regulations,  2015  made  under  the 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 15 www.dakguru.com 
 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), or any other applicable law of the land for 
the time being in force on the subject: 
Provided  further  that  currency  notes,  coins,  or  bank  notes,  shall  invariably  be  transmitted  as 
insured items; or 
(o) other items, the importation or circulation of which is prohibited in the country or territory of 
origin or destination; or 
(p) documents having the character of current and personal correspondence, with the exception 
of  archived  materials,  exchanged  between  persons other  than  the  sender  and  the  addressee or 
persons living with them; or 
(q) anything prohibited in International Postal Services by the Universal Postal Union (UPU) or 
any other organisation; or 
(r) any other thing, prohibited by Central Government from time to time. 
26. Prohibition of international items. 
International  items  not  fulfilling  the  conditions  laid  down  in  these  regulations  shall  not  be 
admitted  and  items  sent  in  furtherance  of  a  fraudulent  act  or  with  the  intention  of  avoiding 
payment of the postage or other postal fee, shall not be admitted. 
27. Application of regulation 25 on international items. 
Regulation 25 shall apply to International items to be transmitted by post to or from any foreign 
country or territory, except in the following cases, namely: - 
(a) such dangerous goods which may be transmitted by post between the country or territory of 
origin and destination that have declared their willingness to admit them either reciprocally or 
in one direction, provided that they comply with national and international relevant laws; 
(b) live animals which shall be admitted in- 
(i)  letter  post  items  other  than  insured  items:  bees,  leeches  and  silk-worms;  parasites  and 
destroyers of  noxious  insects intended for  the control of those insects  and  exchanged  between 
officially  recognised  institutions;  flies  of  the  family  Drosophilidae  for  biomedical  research 
exchanged between officially recognised institutions; 
(ii)  parcels:  live  animals  whose  conveyance  by  post  is  authorised  by  the  postal  regulations  or 
applicable laws of the countries or territories concerned. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 16 www.dakguru.com 
 
28. Transmission of precious metals and precious stones. 
(1)  Precious  metals  (including gold,  silver,  platinum or other  precious  metals),  precious stones 
(including  diamond  or  other  precious  stones),  jewellery  or  any  combination  of  these,  whether 
manufactured or not, coins, bank notes, currency notes, securities of any kind payable to bearer, 
travellers' cheques, except as otherwise specified, shall, in no case, be transmitted by post in an 
uninsured letter-post item. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-rule (1), any country or territory may prohibit the 
enclosure  of  gold  bullion  in  insured  or  uninsured parcels  originating  from  or  addressed  to  its 
territory or sent in transit à découvert (open transit) across its territory; to the actual value of the 
items so transmitted. 
29. Items for blind prohibited in certain cases. 
The items shall be prohibited from being transmitted as printed papers and literature for the blind 
under the following conditions, namely:- 
(a) shall not bear any inscription or contain any item of correspondence; 
(b) shall not contain any postage stamp or form of prepayment, whether cancelled or not, or any 
paper representing a monetary value, except in cases where the item contains as an enclosure, a 
card, envelope or wrapper, bearing the printed address of the sender of the item or his authorised 
person in the country or territory of posting or destination of the original item, which is prepaid 
for return. 
30. Items transmitted in contravention of regulation 27. 
(1)  An item in contravention of  regulation 27 shall, in  no circumstances,  be forwarded to  their 
destination, delivered to the addressees, or returned to origin whichever is applicable. 
(2)  Where,  any  item  referred  to  in  sub-regulation  (1)  is  discovered  during  transit,  it  shall  be 
handled under the applicable law of the country or territory of transit. 
(3) Where, any item referred to in sub-regulation (1) is discovered during transmission, it shall be 
liable  to  be  removed  and  disposed  of  in  the  manner  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions and the remainder of the items shall be forwarded to its destination, together with 
information about the disposal of such inadmissible item. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 17 www.dakguru.com 
 
31. Customs Control. 
(1) All international outbound items tendered at the post office shall be subject to customs control 
and  the  applicable  laws  of  the  country or  territory  of  origin  and  the  country  or  territory  of 
destination. 
(2) All international inward items shall be subject to customs' control and the applicable law of 
the land for the time being in force. 
(3) Any custom duty imposed by the customs department, along with an additional postal fee as 
mentioned as under, shall be charged from the addressee at the time of delivery. 
CUSTOM CLEARANCE 
For clearance through the Customs, a fee, recoverable from the addressee, at the following rate if 
released after levying customs duty 
(a) for each foreign letter packet or insured box; and 
(b) for each foreign parcel or bulk bag of printed matter which weighs more than 500 grams, 
Rupees thirty 
32. Post Office authorised to collect customs duty, etc. 
The Post Office shall be authorised to collect from the sender or addressee of items, as the case 
may be, the customs duty and all other fees which may be due. 
33. Items sent in contravention of any law. 
Any item sent by post in contravention of any Act, rules, regulations, or any other law of the land 
for  the  time  being  in force,  may  be  detained  and disposed of  in  the  manner  as  directed  by  the 
enforcement agency or authority or officer, as the case may be. 
34. Disposal of intercepted items. 
(1) If an official or officer of the Post Office suspects on reasonable grounds that an item in the 
course of its transmission 
(a) contains anything in respect of which an offence is being committed or an attempt to commit 
an offence is being made; or 
(b) contains anything that will afford evidence of the commission of an offence; or 
(c) is being sent to further the commission of an offence; or 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 18 www.dakguru.com 
 
(d) needs to be obtained and examined in the interests of defence, public safety or public order, 
Such official or officer shall inform the competent authority for directions to detain the item for 
the purpose of examination by the concerned law enforcement authority in accordance with the 
provisions of the rules. 
(2)  If,  on  examination  of  an  item  under  sub-regulation  (1),  the  suspicion  that  gave  rise to  its 
examination- 
(a)  is  substantiated,  the  item  may  be  detained  for  the  purposes  of  evidence  in  a  criminal 
prosecution or destroyed or dealt with in such other manner as may be authorised in the orders 
of the law enforcement authorities; 
(b) is not substantiated, the item shall be delivered to the person to whom it is addressed or to the 
authorised person. 
35. Items suspected to contain dangerous substances. 
(1)  Where  an item is  suspected  to  contain  any  explosive,  dangerous, obnoxious,  deleterious or 
filthy substance, or anything likely to injure the mails or any officer of the Post Office, it shall be 
intercepted and detained at the point of transmission, where it is so detected and the officer-in-
charge of the post office shall immediately inform the matter to the police authorities, post office 
authorities and other designated authorities, as may be applicable. 
(2) Further necessary action in respect of the item, shall be taken in accordance with the directions 
of the authorities as referred in sub-regulation (1). 
36. Restriction on disclosure. 
No person may disclose any communication or information, which is obtained in the exercise of 
his powers or the performance of his duties in terms of these regulations, except- 
(a) to any other person, who of necessity requires it for the like exercise or performance of their 
functions in terms of these regulations; 
(b) information which is required to be disclosed in terms of any law or as evidence in any court 
of law. 
 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 19 www.dakguru.com 
 
37. Disposal of items opened. 
(1) If any item opened or examined by designated postal officer under the rules is found to be an 
unlawful item or prohibited item, the items shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions 
of the designated authorities. 
(2) If the item referred to in sub-regulation (1) is found not to be an unlawful or prohibited one, 
it shall be forwarded to its destination as if it had not been so opened or examined. 
38. Notice of opening of an item. 
Where an item that is found to be unlawful, is opened by a postal officer or official under section 
9 of the Act, a notice shall be sent to the sender, and if not found, to the addressee. 
39. No relief from liability. 
The detention, opening, examination, destruction or disposal of an item under the Act or rules or 
these regulations  shall  not  relieve  any  person  from  the  liability  for  any  offence  against  these 
regulations. 
40. No right to compensation. 
No  person  shall  have  any  right  to  compensation,  nor  shall  any  liability  be  incurred  by  the 
Department of Posts in the Ministry of Communications or any of its officers or officials, by the 
reason of the detention, opening, examination, forfeiture, destruction or disposal of an item or its 
enclosure, under the powers conferred by the Act or rules or regulations or the applicable law of 
the land for the time being in force. 
CHAPTER III 
MANNER OF DELIVERY OF ITEMS 
41. Accountable items. 
The delivery of the accountable items shall be made- 
(a)  to  the  addressee or  the  authorized  person  in  case  of  registered  item, insured item,  Cash on 
Delivery, Money order; 
(b) to the authorised person or on the address in case of speed post item, India post parcel, etc. 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 20 www.dakguru.com 
 
42. Accountable items to be issued for delivery. 
(1) An accountable item shall be issued for delivery and if it is not delivered due to any reason on 
its first presentation, it shall be issued once again for delivery. In case of inability to deliver after 
two attempts, it shall, in no case, be issued again for delivery. 
(2) A notice of arrival of the accountable item, shall, however, be issued to the addressee for taking 
delivery of such item himself or by authorised person from the post office. 
43. Addressee to sign in receipt. 
(1) The addressee of an accountable item or an authorised person, shall sign in the receipt and 
proof of delivery, in case relating thereto, of the item, unless the outward appearance of the cover 
gives rise to suspicion of tampering. 
(2)  Where  the  outward  appearance  of  the  cover  of  the  accountable  item  is  suspected  to  be 
tempered, the item shall be opened at the post office, in the presence of the Postmaster, and to 
have its contents entered in an inventory, which shall be prepared in duplicate and shall be signed 
by the addressee. 
(3)  One  copy  of  the  signed  inventory  shall  be  forwarded  by  the  post  office  to  the  sender  with 
unsigned proof of delivery attached to it and in case, the addressee or authorised person is not 
known to the staff of the post office from which the item is to be delivered, the identification of 
the addressee or authorised person by a person known to the post office staff, or the production 
of  evidence  which  will  establish  his  identity  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Postmaster,  shall  be 
necessary if so, required by the delivering post office official. 
44. Letter delivery box of items other than accountable items. 
(1) Items may be delivered in the post box or post bag for such addressee who has availed the 
facility of post box or post bag. 
(2)  In  cases  of  non-availing  of  post  box  or  post  bag,  items  shall  be  delivered  through  a  letter 
delivery box installed in the premises of the addressee. 
(3) A letter delivery box with the name and address superscribed thereon and of such dimension 
as per the requirement of the addressee, shall be installed by the addressee on the ground floor 
of each of the house or buildings referred to in sub-regulation (2) in which the addressee is located 
and such letter delivery boxes shall be located at a convenient place which is easily accessible to 
the Postman or delivery person. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 21 www.dakguru.com 
 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-regulation, the term "building" refers to construction 
having two storeys or more, including high-rise buildings, and are in existence or construction of 
which has been completed; 
Provided that a single letter delivery box may be provided as a common letter box by one or more 
or all the addressees located in a building or same floor of the building: 
Provided further that where an item required to be delivered against receipt remains undelivered 
due to non-availability of the addressee, an intimation relating thereto may be given through the 
letter delivery box or through digital communication. 
(4) Every such letter delivery box shall be provided with a posting aperture located at the top and 
facing the front, incorporating a horizontal ledge projecting inwards from the lower edge of the 
posting aperture. 
(5)  Where  such  a  letter  delivery  box  is  not  installed,  the  delivery  of  such  items  shall  only  be 
effected at the post office till the time the letter delivery box is installed. 
(6)  Where  there  is  a  genuine  difficulty  in  complying  with  the  provisions  of  this  order  in  a 
particular building, the Divisional Head, for reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt the said 
building from the provisions of this regulation. 
(7) Items of such size that cannot be delivered in a letter delivery box, and unpaid or insufficiently 
paid items shall be delivered to the addressee or authorised person or on the address, through 
the Postman or delivery person. 
(8) The delivery of the unpaid or insufficiently paid items shall be made only after collection of 
the postage, required to be collected. 
45. Window delivery. 
The addressee of an item may avail the facility of receiving items at the post office during business 
hours without having the facility of post box or post bag system, by giving a written request to 
the Postmaster without any charge and in such case, the item shall not be given to Postman for 
doorstep delivery. 
46. Post box. 
(1) The Post Offices at which Post Box is available, shall be determined by the Head of Circle. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 22 www.dakguru.com 
 
Application Process: 
(2) (a) The applicant shall make an application prescribed by the Head of the Circle, stating the 
exact nature of the business and furnish full particulars of his business address. 
(b)  In  case  of  change  in  business  address,  customer  shall invariably  inform  the  Postmaster 
concerned regarding the change within seven days of such change. In the event of his failure to 
do so, the post box is liable to be withdrawn without notice or without any reason being assigned 
(c)  The  Department  reserve the  right  to  withdraw  the  post  box  without  notice  or  without  any 
reason being assigned, in case of wrong information furnished in the application or misuse of the 
post box. 
Renewal: 
(3)  Application for  the  renewal of  the  allotment of  a  post  box  shall  be  made  to  the  Postmaster 
concerned at least 15 days before the expiry of the period for allotment. 
Items to be delivered: 
(4) Only fully prepaid unaccountable items addressed to the customer or c/o customer in whose 
name  the  post  box  stands  registered,  shall  be  delivered  through  post  box  bearing  post  box 
number. 
Provided accountable items may also be delivered through post box if customer made a written 
request for the same to the postmaster concerned. Such delivery shall deem to be delivery to the 
addressee. 
Manner of payment of fee and other charges: 
(5) (a) The prescribed fee shall be paid in advance along with the application for allotment of a 
post box or for renewal thereof. Such fee shall, in no case, be refunded or adjusted. 
(b) (i) A security deposit, as determined by the Head of the Circle, shall be paid on the allotment 
of a post box. Such deposit shall not be adjusted in whole or in part against the deposit or the fee 
due in respect of any other post box. 
(ii) If the key of the lock, lock or both is lost, damaged or not in working condition, the customer 
shall bring the matter to the notice of the postmaster concerned within 7 days and credit the cost 
of repairing or replacing lock, key of the lock or both, failing which the deposit made by him shall 
be forfeited. On crediting of the cost, customer shall be supplied with a new lock, key or both, as 
the case may be, by the Postmaster. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 23 www.dakguru.com 
 
Post Box and Post Bag Fees: 
Post Box and Post Bag Fee (in Rs.) 
(a) Post Boxes or Bags if taken separately 
 
(i) If rented for full financial year 150 
(ii) For three calendar months or part thereof, if rented for a period of less than a 
full financial year 
50 
(b) Post Box and Bag combined together with the same or different number 
 
(i) If rented for full financial year 250 
(ii) For three calendar months or part thereof, if rented for a period of less than a 
full financial year 
80 
Period of allotment: 
(6) The period of allotment of a post box commences from the first day of month in which the 
post box is allotted and the period of renewal of allotment commences from the first day of the 
month immediately succeeding the period of previous allotment. 
Clearance of Post Box: 
(7)  (a)  At  the  time of  allotment of  Post  Box, Postmaster shall provide a  delivery  ticket, bearing 
same number as that allotted to the post box and is not transferable, to the customer which will 
be produced on demand. 
(b) Customer may clear allotted post box at any time during the business hours of the post office. 
(c) (i) Where any item addressed to a post box number cannot, in view of its size or for want of 
space in the box, be placed therein, the Postmaster shall arrange an intimation slip to this effect 
to be placed in the post box and the item will be kept in the delivery department. 
(ii) On the customer or his messenger presenting the intimation slip together with the delivery 
ticket, the item shall be handed over to him. 
47. Post bags. 
(a) The system of delivery of items in a bag, which along with a lock and duplicate key is to be 
supplied  by  the  customer,  is  available  at  all  delivery  post  offices,  whether  post  box  system  is 
available there or not. 
(b) The foregoing provisions relating to the post boxes shall apply mutatis mutandis to the post 
bags, except in the following respects. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 24 www.dakguru.com 
 
(i) locked post bags with the items placed inside the bag is handed over to the customer or his 
messenger over the counter on the production of the delivery ticket during the hours prescribed 
for making window delivery; 
(ii) these bags with the exception of those allotment in combination with post box same number 
may be used by the customer for dispatching to the post office fully prepaid items for posting. 
48. Smart delivery box. 
(1)  The  Circle  Head  is  authorised  to  designate  the  post  offices  or  other  locations, where  the 
services of the smart delivery box are available. 
(2)  The  service shall  be  availed  by  anyone  by  applying  to  the  post office  along  with  the  fee or 
charge as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(3) The smart delivery box shall be used for delivery of such items addressed to the assignee of 
the box as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
49. Delivery to public officers. 
(1)  Items superscribed  "On India  Government  Service",  and containing  in  the  address both  the 
name and official designation of a public officer or does not contain the official designation, shall 
be delivered or redirected according to the official designation even when the person named no 
longer holds the appointment designated or has left the station. 
(2) Items which do not bear the superscription "On India Government Service", but contain in the 
address both the name and official designation of a public officer, shall be delivered or redirected 
according  to  the  name,  whereas  items  which do  not  contain  the  name  in  the  address,  shall  be 
delivered according to the official designation of the addressee. 
50. Special procedure for delivering items to firms, etc. 
(1) The items addressed for delivery to a firm or company, shall be delivered to the authorised 
person by the owner, partner, or proprietor, as the case may be. 
(2) The authority letter shall be given by the owner or proprietor or partner, as the case may be, 
to the Postmaster of the delivery post office of the area where the office of the firm or company is 
situated. 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 25 www.dakguru.com 
 
51. Items addressed to deceased persons. 
Items addressed to persons who are dead, shall be treated as if they were unclaimed and disposed 
of as per provisions of sub regulation (2) of regulation 65. 
52. Delivery of damaged item. 
Where an accountable item is received in the office of delivery in a damaged condition, a notice 
shall be sent to the addressee requesting him to attend the post office within seven days in the 
case of domestic item and fifteen days in the case of international item to take delivery and the 
delivery  or  disposal  of  such  item  shall  be  effected  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions. 
53. Intimation to addressee. 
The intimation to the addressee shall be served by the Postman for accountable items as may be 
specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
54. Seeking identification of addressee, if needed. 
(1)  The postman or  delivery  person  may  seek  the  identification  of  the  addressee or  authorised 
person before delivering the item, in case, the addressee or the authorised person is not known 
to him. 
(2) The delivery of accountable items containing passport, Permanent Account Number (PAN) 
card, driving licence, and other items, shall be delivered only after seeking the identification of 
the recipient in a manner as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
55. Redirection of items. 
(1) The sender of an item may avail the following facility in respect of the accountable domestic 
item and international inward item, by paying a postal fee Rs. 6/-, without reference to the consent 
of the addressee, namely 
(a) recall of the item from the post: 
Provided that the item may be cancelled before it has been dispatched from the office of booking 
for any reason as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time; or 
(b) alteration in address or name of the addressee. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 26 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2) The addressee of an item may avail the facility of alteration in address, free of charge in case 
where the original address and the substitute address are within the delivery area of the same 
post office; or otherwise by paying a postal fee, as mentioned in sub-regulation (1). 
(3) The Post Office shall give a receipt of the applicable fees. 
Procedure for Cancellation of an Article: 
i. The sender or their authorized representative must submit a written request for cancellation at 
the same post office where the item was booked. This request should include: 
 Original receipt of the booking. 
 Item number and other booking details. 
 Reason for cancellation. 
ii.  The sender or  authorized  representative  must provide  valid  identification  (such  as  Aadhaar 
card, PAN card, etc.) to verify their authority to cancel the article. 
iii. The postal staff will verify if the article is still at the booking post office. If the article has not 
yet been dispatched, the cancellation request will be processed. 
iv.  If  the  cancellation  request  is  approved,  the  item  may  be  returned  to  the  sender  or  his 
authorized representative under proper receipt upon verification of identity. 
v. As far as refund is concerned, it is specified that no request of refund shall be entertained under 
any circumstances for domestic item containing documents. For other item, the refund amount 
will be processed based on the guidelines prescribed for that specific service 
56. Request to avail certain facilities. 
No request of the sender or addressee of an item, under regulation 57 shall be entertained if the 
item  is  out  for  delivery  at  the  destination  post  office,  or  has  been  seized,  or  confiscated,  or 
destroyed under any applicable law of the land concerned. 
57. Manner of making request. 
(1)  A  sender  or  addressee  or  authorised  person  may  make  a  written  request  for  availing  the 
facilities mentioned in regulation 55, with reasons, accompanied by the applicable fee, to the post 
office: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 27 www.dakguru.com 
 
Provided  that  no  such  request  shall  be  entertained  in  case  of  an  item  addressed  to  a  foreign 
country or territory unless such item is addressed to a country or territory as may be specified by 
administrative instructions in this regard. 
(2) Postage and applicable fee, once paid, shall, in no circumstances, be refunded. 
58. Post Office not liable for non-fulfilment of request. 
Subject to the conditions mentioned in regulations 55 and 56, the Post Office shall not be liable 
for  non  fulfilment  of  the  request  of  the  sender  and  shall  not  incur  any  liability  by  reason  of 
delivery of any item contrary to an application made in this regard: Provided that, in such cases, 
the fee charged for such a request shall be refunded. 
59. Postage payable on delivery. 
The Postmaster or officer in-charge, shall ensure that the following classes of items are properly 
charged with postage in their presence: 
(a) insufficiently paid items that have been treated as fully prepaid; 
(b) unpaid items that are not impressed with the postage due stamp; and 
(c) items that have not been charged by the offices of dispatch with the full amount of postage 
due on them. 
60. Postage-due stamp. 
(1) The postage-due stamp shall be impressed on the items mentioned in regulation 59 and the 
amount  shown  by  the  impression  of  the  postage  due  stamp  of  the  office  of  dispatch  shall  be 
mentioned under the initials of the Postmaster or the officer in-charge or the authorised office or 
official. 
(2) In the case of an item received by foreign post, postage shall not, under any circumstances, be 
charged by any post office other than the foreign post office through which it passes. 
(3) If an unpaid item of the foreign post, which has not been impressed with the T - stamp by the 
office of origin and has not been taxed by the foreign post office through obvious error, is received 
in a post office for delivery, then such item shall be sent back to the foreign post office concerned 
to be properly taxed and shall be delivered on receipt back after recovery of the postage due: 
Provided that items received with just printed impressions indicating the country or territory of 
origin  and  the  phrase  "Tax  persue"  meaning  "charge  collected",  "Port  paye"  meaning  "Postage 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 28 www.dakguru.com 
 
Paid", or a similar expression in the language of the country or territory of origin, without any 
amount  of  the  postage  collected  being  indicated,  shall  not  be  taxed  either  by  the  offices  of 
exchange or by the offices of delivery and shall be delivered as if fully prepaid. 
61. Delivery of items on which customs duty is due. 
Items  on  which  customs  duty  to  be  recovered  is  in  excess  of  the  amount  as  specified  by 
administrative  instructions  from  time  to  time,  shall  ordinarily  be  delivered  at  the  post  office 
window and such duty may be paid either in cash or by cheque or by any other specified mode. 
62. Refusal of items. 
(1) The addressee of an item shall not be bound to pay the amount due on it to the post office, if 
he does not want to take delivery of it and in such case, the word "Refused" shall be written by 
the Postman across the cover. 
(2)  Unclaimed  and  refused  items  shall  be  returned,  at  once,  direct  to  the  offices  of  posting  for 
delivery to the sender and if the sender of such items so returned to the office of posting cannot 
be found, the items shall then be sent to the Returned Letter Office. 
(3) In respect of international item, such item shall be returned to the foreign post office for further 
disposal. 
63. Obligation to pay sum charged. 
When a person takes delivery of an item on which any sum is due to the Post Office, he shall pay 
the amount marked upon it. 
64. Detention and disposal of undelivered items at post office of addressee. 
(1)  An  item  shall ordinarily  be  kept in  deposit  in  the  post office  to  which  it  is  addressed for  a 
period of seven days after all enquiries to find the addressee have proved unsuccessful. 
(2)  Delivery  Post  Offices  will  maintain  a  proper  record  of  all  such  requests  for  retention  and 
monitor the item held in deposit to ensure timely delivery or pickup within the prescribed period. 
65. Undelivered items to be returned in certain cases. 
(1) An undelivered item, of which the addressee- 
(a)  has  refused,  or  after  due  notice  omitted,  to  take  delivery,  or  the  addressee  does  not  take 
delivery within the period as specified by administrative instructions from time to time; or 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 29 www.dakguru.com 
 
(b) is known to have left address without intimation to the post office as to the redirection of his 
correspondence; or 
(c)  is  dead  and  there is  no person  to  whom  the  item  could  properly  be delivered, shall  not  be 
detained in the post office to which it is addressed and shall be returned to the sender if the item 
bears clearly on the outside, the name and address of the sender, or otherwise sent to the Returned 
Letter Office concerned. 
(2) The item referred to in sub-regulation (1) shall be delivered to the sender or authorised person 
and any proof of delivery attached thereto shall not be delivered and destroyed. 
(3) In case of the item being undelivered to the sender, such item shall be sent to the Returned 
Letter Office (RLO) concerned. 
66. Standard remarks on undelivered items. 
(1) The reasons for non-delivery shall be recorded by use of the standard remarks, as specified by 
administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2) The production of an item, having thereon the official mark of the Post Office denoting that 
the item  has  been  dealt  with  as indicated  by  any  of  the standard  remarks, as  specified in sub-
regulation  (1)  shall  be  proof  of  the  fact  so  denoted  and  the  person  from  whom  the  item  is 
purported to have come, shall, until the contrary is proved, be deemed to be the sender thereof. 
Standard Remarks and Procedures: 
Sl. 
No. 
Standard 
Remarks 
Scenarios where Standard Remark to be 
used. 
Final   Disposal   of   the 
Article 
1 Refused Addressee is   present   but   declines   to 
accept the article for any reason. 
Returned to sender 
2 Addressee not 
found 
Address  is  located,  but  the  addressee  is 
not  available  at  the  address  in  case  of 
addressee specific delivery. 
Keep   in   deposit   for 7 
days and    if    nobody 
claims, returned to 
sender 
3 Addressee left 
without 
instructions 
Addressee is known to have left without 
leaving forwarding instructions. 
Returned to sender 
4 Premises Locked When  multiple  attempts  are  made,  but 
the   premises   are   consistently   found 
closed. 
Returned to sender 
5 Insufficient 
Address 
Address  is  incomplete  or  inadequate  to 
locate the recipient despite best efforts. 
Returned to sender 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 30 www.dakguru.com 
 
6 Unclaimed Delivery attempt made and 
notice/intimation  served,  but  item  not 
collected within prescribed time. 
Returned to sender 
7 Deceased Addressee has passed away. Return to sender 
8 Redirected Item forwarded  to  a  new  address  based 
on addressee's written instructions. 
Redirected  on  the  same 
day 
9 Missent Item is received missent. Item will be redirected to 
correct address/Post 
office for further delivery 
10 No Such Person No such person is residing at the address 
mentioned on the article 
Returned to sender 
11 Damage Shall   be   dealt   as   per   the   prescribed 
procedure to deal such damaged articles. 
- 
12 Beat change Item  intended  for  some  other  beat  but 
wrongly invoiced to some other beat. 
To be invoiced to correct 
beat 
13 Poste Restante Poste Restante (C/o Postmaster) item will 
be  kept  with  the  Postmaster  for 15  days 
and if not claimed, it will be returned to 
sender 
Returned to sender (after 
15 days) 
14 Others Any remarks which are not covered in Sl 
1 to 14. 
Suitable   action   will   be 
taken 
67. Detention and disposal of undelivered items at Returned Letter Office (RLO). 
The  items  that  remain  undelivered  to  the  address  as  well  as  the  sender,  shall  be  detained  at 
Returned Letter Office for a period of - 
(a) fifteen days when they are unaccountable; and (b) thirty days when they are accountable. 
Explanation.- For  the  purpose  of  this  rule,  "Returned  Letter  Office"  means  an  office  that  deals 
with  unclaimed  and  refused  items,  or  items  without  addresses,  or  with  undecipherable  or 
incomplete addresses. 
68. Procedure in case of dealing undelivered items. 
(1) The undelivered items referred to in regulation 64 to 66 shall be dealt with as follows: - 
(a) items without intrinsic value, such as, items containing printed or handwritten papers, shall 
be disposed of forthwith by selling it as waste paper or destroyed; 
(b) magazines, periodicals and newspapers may, at the option of the Regional Head, be used for 
any public purpose; 
(c) items with intrinsic value shall be disposed of through auction; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 31 www.dakguru.com 
 
(d)  postcards  and  letter  cards  on  which  the  postage  has  not  been  prepaid  shall  be  destroyed 
forthwith; 
Provided  that  nothing  in  this  regulation  shall  prevent  the  immediate  destruction  of  any  item 
deemed necessary for public good. 
(2) On the expiration of the period specified in regulation 67, the item shall be disposed of, in a 
manner as deemed fit by the Circle Head or the Regional Head concerned, in the Returned Letter 
Office. 
69. Period for which intimation regarding change in address remain valid. 
(1) A resident can give written intimation, regarding change in his residential or official address, 
to the concerned post office for delivery of the items addressed to him or to his address to the 
new address. 
(2) Such intimation shall remain valid for a period not exceeding three months. 
(3) the provisions of sub-regulation (2) of regulation 55 shall mutatis mutandis be applicable for 
delivery of items. 
70. Officers or officials authorised to make an official mark. 
(1) The following officers or officials are authorised to make an official mark on items denoting 
that any postage or other sum is due in respect thereof to the Post Office and such mark shall be 
the  proof  that  the  sum  so  denoted  is  due;  and  that  the  item  has  been  refused  or  rejected  or 
unclaimed, or cannot for any other reason be delivered: - 
(a) Postmaster of the office; 
(b) concerned supervisor and officials, who have been assigned with the work of delivery of the 
items; 
(c) Postman or the authorised delivery person. 
(2)  In  the  cases  related  with  branch  post  offices,  the  delegation  of  work,  as  referred  to  in  sub-
regulation (1) performed by the Post Master and Postman or authorised delivery person shall be 
performed by the Grameen Dak Sevak Branch Postmaster and Grameen Dak Sevak performing 
the work of delivery of items respectively. 
(3)  The procedure for the  purposes of  these  regulations shall  be  as specified  by  administrative 
instructions from time to time. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 32 www.dakguru.com 
 
71. Recovery of dues in respect of unpaid and insufficiently paid domestic items. 
Any item on which the postage or airmail fee thereon is not prepaid, or is insufficiently prepaid, 
shall, on delivery of the postal articles to the addressee or, in case of undeliverable, to the sender, 
be charged with the rates as mentioned in Table - 
Rates Chargeable on Domestic Items 
Condition Charge 
(i) On an unpaid item Double the prepaid rate 
(ii) On an insufficiently paid item Double the deficiency 
Note: The postage or air mail fee actually charged shall in no case be less than rupee one. 
72. Recovery of dues in respect of unpaid and insufficiently paid international items. 
(1) Any inward international item on which the postage or airmail fee thereon is not prepaid or 
is  insufficiently  prepaid,  shall,  on  delivery  of  the  postal  articles  to  the  addressee  or,  in  case  of 
undeliverable, to the sender, be charged with the rates as mentioned in Table 
Rates Chargeable on International Items 
Condition Charge 
(i) On an unpaid item Double the prepaid rate 
(ii) On an insufficiently paid item Double the deficiency 
Note: The postage or air mail fee actually charged shall in no case be less than rupee one. 
(2) Any outward international item on which the postage or airmail fee thereon is not prepaid or 
is insufficiently prepaid, shall not be forwarded to the destination but shall be delivered to the 
sender without any charge. 
CHAPTER IV 
COMPENSATION 
73. Compensation for loss, damage etc. of items. 
(1) The Post Office shall be liable to pay compensation for loss of item, abstraction of content, loss 
of content, damage to content, or damage to item, for various categories of items, subject to the 
conditions as specified in this Chapter. 
(2) The compensation shall be payable to the sender: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 33 www.dakguru.com 
 
Provided that the compensation shall be payable to the addressee if the sender waives his right 
in favour of the addressee. 
(3) The compensation for consequential loss or damage or any other such loss or damage shall 
not be payable. 
74. Compensation for registered item. 
(1)  The  compensation  to  be  paid  in  respect  of  domestic  registered  items  shall  be  Subject  to  a 
maximum of Rs. 100/- (Rupees One Hundred) or the actual value of contents, whichever is less. 
(2) The compensation to be paid in respect of international registered items shall be 30 SDR. 
75. Compensation for speed post item. 
(1) The compensation to be paid in respect of domestic speed post items shall be: 
(a) For loss of item, abstraction of content, loss of content, damage to content or damage to item: 
Double the Speed Post charges or Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand), whichever is less. 
(b) For delay in delivery: Speed Post charges. 
(2) The compensation to be paid in respect of international speed post items (EMS) shall be: 
(a) For loss of item, abstraction of content, loss of content, damage to content or damage to item: 
30 SDR. 
(b) For delay in delivery: Difference between the EMS charges and the registered post charges. 
76. Compensation for insured item. 
(1) The compensation to be paid in respect of domestic insured items shall be the insured value 
or the actual value of the contents, whichever is less. 
(2)  The  compensation  to  be  paid in  respect of  international insured items shall  be  Subject  to  a 
maximum of the insured value or the actual value of contents, whichever is less: 
Provided that for loss of item, abstraction of content, loss of content, damage to content or damage 
to item, the compensation shall not exceed the insured amount. 
77. Compensation for India Post Parcel. 
The compensation to be paid in respect of India Post Parcel shall be Subject to a maximum of Rs. 
500/- (Rupees Five Hundred) or the actual value of contents, whichever is less. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 34 www.dakguru.com 
 
78. Compensation for International Air Parcel. 
The compensation  to  be  paid  in  respect of  International Air  Parcel shall  be 40  SDR  per  parcel 
plus 4.50 SDR per kg. 
79. Compensation for International Tracked Packet. 
The  compensation  to  be  paid  in  respect  of  International  Tracked  Packet  shall  be Subject  to  a 
maximum of 30 SDR. 
80. Compensation for money remittance services. 
(1) The compensation to be paid in respect of domestic money remittance services (e.g., Money 
Order) shall be: 
(a) For loss of money order: The amount of money order plus the commission paid. 
(b) For delay in payment: The interest at the rate of savings bank account for the period of delay 
on the amount of money order. 
(2) The compensation to be paid in respect of international money remittance services shall be the 
amount of money remittance plus the commission paid. 
81. Value Payable Post (VPP) / Cash on Delivery (COD). 
(1) The compensation to be paid in respect of domestic VPP or COD items shall be: 
(a) For loss of item: Subject to a maximum of Rs. 500/- or actual value of contents, whichever is 
less. 
(b)  If  the  amount  has  been  collected  from  the  addressee  but  not  remitted  to  the  sender:  The 
amount collected. 
(2) The Post Office shall not be liable for any compensation if the item has been delivered to the 
addressee and the amount has been remitted to the sender. 
82. Conditions for payment of compensation. 
(1) No compensation shall be payable: 
(a) if the claim is not made within the period specified in regulation 83; 
(b) if the loss or damage is caused by the fault or negligence of the sender or the addressee; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 35 www.dakguru.com 
 
(c) if the item contained anything prohibited from transmission by post; 
(d)  if  the item  was  seized or  detained  by  any competent  authority under  any law for  the  time 
being in force; 
(e) if the sender has not packed the item securely; 
(f) in case of "force majeure" events (e.g., natural disasters, war, civil commotion). 
(2) The decision of the Department of Posts regarding the payment of compensation shall be final. 
83. Time limit for claiming compensation. 
The claim for compensation shall be preferred within the following time limits from the date of 
booking of the item: 
(a) For domestic items: Three months. 
(b) For international items: Six months (or as per UPU regulations). 
84. Procedure for claiming compensation. 
(1) The claim for compensation shall be submitted to the office of booking or the office of delivery, 
in the form and manner as specified by administrative instructions. 
(2) The claimant shall produce the original receipt of booking along with the claim application. 
(3) The Department may require the claimant to produce evidence of the value of the contents. 
85. Liability of the Post Office. 
The  liability  of  the  Post  Office  shall  be  limited  to  the  compensation  amounts  specified  in  this 
Chapter and shall not extend to any indirect or consequential loss or damage. 
86. Ex gratia payment. 
The  Department of Posts  may, in  exceptional cases, consider  ex gratia  payment, subject  to  the 
approval of the Director General, Postal Services. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 36 www.dakguru.com 
 
CHAPTER V 
A. LETTER POST ITEMS 
DOMESTIC ITEMS 
87. Letters. 
(1) Letter is a communication in the nature of current and personal correspondence addressed to 
a person transmitted by post with pre-payment of postage. 
(2) Every letter shall be posted in securely closed condition. 
(3) The weight of the letter shall not exceed 500 grams. 
(4) Every letter for transmission by post shall conform to the following maximum and minimum 
dimensions, namely:- 
(i) Maximum dimensions: 
 In roll form: Single dimension 800 mm; Sum of length and twice diameter 1000 mm. 
 In  other  than  roll  form:  Single  dimension  600  mm;  Sum  of  length  and  breadth  and 
thickness combined 900 mm. 
(ii) Minimum dimensions: 
 In roll form: Single dimension 100 mm; Sum of length and twice diameter 170 mm. 
 In other than roll form: 140 mm x 90 mm with tolerance of +- 2mm. 
88. Letters in other than roll form. 
(1) Letter in other than roll form shall be in envelopes of the following sizes; 
(a) minimum 140 x 90 mm; and (b) maximum 458 x 324 mm; with tolerance of +- 2 mm. 
(2) Every envelope shall have the flap either at the top on back of the longer side or at right or 
left. 
(3) Every envelope shall be made of paper having thickness from 0.15 mm to 0.5 mm. 
(4) Surface of the envelope shall be levelled with uniform surface structure. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 37 www.dakguru.com 
 
(5) Every envelope shall be continuously closed on all sides taking care to avoid a residue of gum 
on the envelope itself and metal clips or staples shall not be used for closing the envelope. 
(6) Every envelope shall be made of minimum 70 Grams per Square Meter. 
(7) Every envelope shall be flexible enough to bend into "U shape". 
(8) Every envelope with window shall have sizes of window between 35-50 mm (breadth) and 
80-125 mm (length) and the contents shall be placed in such manner that only address block which 
includes bar code shall be visible through window. 
(9) Glassine paper of 35 Grams per Square Meter, Cellophane paper of 40 Grams per Square Meter 
and Polyvinyl Chloride or Biaxially Oriented Polypropylene of 15-micron thickness shall be used 
as window material. 
(10) Distance of left edge of window from left edge of envelope shall be minimum 15 mm, distance 
of top edge of window shall be minimum 40 mm, and distance of bottom edge of window from 
bottom edge of envelope shall be minimum 15 mm. 
(11) Logo  and  name of  the  sender's company  may  be  written on  top left corner  and stamps or 
frank  impression  on  top  right  corner  having  gap  of  minimum  10  mm  from  address  block  of 
recipient. 
(12) 15 mm shall be left for bar code printing at the bottom of envelope and 5 mm quiet space 
around 2D barcode or Quick Response Code shall be provided and the sender's logo size shall 
not exceed 25x50 mm in size and the 2D barcode or Quick Response Code shall have minimum 
size 18x18 mm. 
(13) The size of printed bar code or digital code along with quiet zone shall be kept minimum 60 
mm in length and 10 mm in breadth in a window of envelope and shall be clearly visible. 
(14) In case of infringement of the conditions mentioned in regulation 87 and sub regulation (1) 
to (13) of regulation 88, the letter shall be charged with double the postage and any postage paid 
on it shall be taken into account in assessing the charges. 
(15)  The  discount  and  value  additions  to  the  customers  for  letters  may  be  specified  by 
administrative  instructions  in  accordance  with  the  norms  determined  by  the  Director  General 
from time to time. 
(16) The rates of postage chargeable on letters shall be as mentioned in as under - 
(a) Letters 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 38 www.dakguru.com 
 
Weight Slab Rate 
(i) For a weight not exceeding twenty grams ₹ 5/- 
(ii) For every twenty grams or fraction thereof ₹ 5/- 
 
89. Letter cards. 
Letter cards may be transmitted by post, if it conforms to the following specifications, namely: - 
(a) the postage shall be prepaid in full; 
(b) the weight of the letter card shall not exceed five grams; 
(c) the dimensions of the letter card including its flaps when unfolded or folded shall respectively 
be as follows: - 
Unfolded 
 Maximum - 300 mm by 210 mm. 
 Minimum - 282 mm by 182 mm. 
Flaps- Letter Card shall have three flaps, one each on the left and right side not exceeding 15 mm 
by 100 mm and another on the top side not exceeding 15 mm by 210 mm and the flaps may not 
be required if the letter card can be closed by any other effective process. 
Folded 
 Maximum - 210 mm by 100 mm 
 Minimum - 152 mm by 90 mm 
(d) nothing shall be attached to or enclosed in a letter card; 
(e) there shall be printed on the outside at the top left-hand corner on the address side of every 
folded letter intended for domestic transmission the words "Letter Card"; and 
(f) letter card shall be made of paper of minimum 70 Grams per Square Meter. 
Explanation 1.- For the purposes of this regulation, "Letter card" means a sheet of paper of the 
kind ordinarily used for letter writing suitably folded and gummed. 
Explanation 2.- Letter cards of private manufacture shall be suitably folded and fully closed on 
three sides  by  continuous  gumming, glue or  any other  adhesive  provided the  dimensions  and 
other conditions mentioned in this regulation are complied with. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 39 www.dakguru.com 
 
90. Conditions where infringed. 
(1)  In  case  of  infringement  of  the  conditions  specified  in  regulation  89,  the  letter  card  shall  be 
treated  as  a  letter  and  charged  on  delivery  with  double  the  deficiency  between  the  postage 
already paid for such letter card and the postage payable for a letter. 
(2) The rates of postage chargeable on letter cards shall be as mentioned as under - 
(b) Letter Cards 
Item Rate 
For a letter card ₹ 2.50/- 
 
91. Postcards. 
(1) Postcards may be transmitted by post, if it shall conform to the following conditions, namely: 
(a) the postage shall be prepaid in full; 
(b) the weight of the post card shall not exceed five grams; 
(c) their dimensions shall be 140 mm x 90 mm and they shall have the legend, "Post Card" written 
in Hindi or English or printed on the address side; 
(d) as regards substance, they shall be neither thinner nor more flexible than the post cards issued 
by the Post Office; 
(e) no post card shall be folded, enclosed in any cover, cut or otherwise altered except that the 
impressed postage stamp (if any) may be perforated with initials; 
(f) the right-hand of the address-side of a postcard is in all cases reserved for the address of the 
recipient, for the postage stamp or impression of stamping machine necessary for prepayment, 
which  may,  so  far  as  possible,  be  affixed  in  the  upper  righthand  corner,  and  for  the  postal 
directions but the left hand half of the address-side, as well as the back, may be used by the sender 
for the purpose of a communication or single colour or multi colour printed advertisement and 
address  of  the  sender  may  be  written  on  top  left-hand  corner  of  back,  or  may  be  otherwise 
disposed of, subject to the restriction mentioned in sub-regulation (g): 
Provided that a small space marked off by lines or minute dots to indicate the place where the 
postage stamp is to be affixed, shall be allowed on the upper righthand corner of the address-side 
of postcards; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 40 www.dakguru.com 
 
(g) nothing shall be attached to a post card except- 
(i) stamps in payment of postage or other postal fees which shall be affixed only to the address 
side of the post card; 
(ii) a gummed label completely adherent to the card, and bearing the name and address of the 
person to whom the card is sent; 
(iii)  a similar label not  exceeding  50  mm  in length  and  20  mm  in  width  bearing  the  name  and 
address of the sender of the card; and 
(iv)  engravings,  illustrations,  drawings  and  photographs  on  very  thin  paper  and  completely 
adherent to the card. 
Provided that the items specified in sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) shall be affixed either to the back or 
the left-hand half of the address side. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this regulation, "Post card" means an open communication on 
a rectangular card of prescribed size, having a stamp of the prescribed value impressed on it. 
(2) In case of infringement of any of the conditions specified in sub-regulation (1), the postcard 
shall  be  treated  as  a  letter  and  charged  on  delivery  with  double  the  deficiency  between  the 
postage already paid for such postcard and the postage payable for a letter subject to a minimum 
of one rupee, and where such amount is a part of a rupee containing paise, the amount shall be 
increased to one rupee. 
(3) The rates of postage chargeable on postcard shall be as mentioned in as under - 
(c) Postcards 
Item Rate 
For a Postcard 50 paise 
 
 
92. Book post. 
(1) Item containing book, cards, magazines, journals, publications of all kinds, paper, sheets, bills, 
invoices, reports, or any document of commercial, legal or personal nature in single or multiple 
copies, may be transmitted by post as "book post", subject to the following conditions, namely: - 
(a) a book post shall not exceed 5 kilograms in weight; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 41 www.dakguru.com 
 
(b) the dimensions of a book post shall be subject to the following maximum and minimum limits: 
- 
(i) Maximum: 
 In roll form - length 800 mm; Sum of length and twice diameter 1000 mm 
 In other than roll form - 600 x 300 x 300 mm 
(ii) Minimum: 
 In roll form - Single dimension 100 mm; Sum of length and twice diameter 170 mm 
 In other than roll form - 140 mm x 90 mm with tolerance of +- 2 mm; 
(c)  book  post  when  sent open in card form,  whether folded or  not shall  be  neither  thinner  nor 
more flexible than postcard; 
(d) book post shall be consigned in an unfastened envelope of the following sizes, provided its 
dimensions are not less than 140 x 90 mm and not more than 353 x 250 mm; with tolerance of +- 
2 mm; 
(e) the item shall have the inscription "Book Post" on the address side of the item; 
(f) a book post shall be posted without a cover, or in an unfastened envelope, or in a cover under 
"Book Post", which can be easily removed for the purpose of examination without breaking any 
seal or tearing any paper or separating any adhering surfaces and a packet posted without a cover 
may not be fastened or otherwise treated so as to prevent easy examination; 
(g) a book post shall not contain "paper money", which for the purposes of this regulation includes 
unobliterated postage or other stamps, hundies, cheques, bank post bills, bills of exchange, and 
all orders or authorities for the payment of money: 
Provided  that  a  book  post  may  contain  one  stamped  and  addressed  envelope,  post  card  or 
wrapper bearing the name and address of the sender of the packet, or some other person named 
thereon; 
(h)  any  document contained in  the  book post item  shall not  be  addressed  to  an  addressee  nor 
stem from a sender other than those of the item: 
Provided that all items posted as book post shall be treated as letter post if the weight is upto 500 
gms, or as parcel post if the weight is more than 500 gms. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 42 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2) In case of infringement of any of the conditions mentioned in sub-regulation (1), the book post 
shall be treated as a letter and on delivery, be charged with double the postage payable on letter 
or  India  post  parcel  according  to  whichever  entails  lower  charge  (subject  to  the  conditions 
prescribed for such class of items being satisfied) and any postage paid on it shall be taken into 
account in assessing the charges. 
(3) The rates of postage chargeable on book post shall be as mentioned as under- 
(d) Book Post 
Weight Slab Rate 
(i) For the first fifty grams or fraction thereof ₹ 4/- 
(ii) For every additional fifty grams or fraction thereof in excess of fifty grams ₹ 3/- 
 
92 A. GYAN POST. 
(1)  A  book or packet containing  the  books  related  with  the following, may  be  transmitted  as  a 
"Gyan Post" item, subject to the conditions mentioned in sub regulations (2): 
(a) prescribed in syllabus for correspondence and regular courses for students by: 
(i) recognized boards of education, universities of the Government; 
(ii) autonomous bodies and statutory bodies under the Government 
(b) containing the literature related with social, cultural and religious nature issued or published 
in accordance with relevant law of the land; 
(c) text book used by aspirants of various competitive examinations 
Explanation.- (1)  "Book" includes  every volume, part or  division  of  a  volume, in  any language 
and  every  sheet  of  music,  map,  chart  or  plan  separately  printed  and  consists  wholly  or 
substantially of  reading  matter, paintings,  photographs,  diagrams or  any other similar  matter, 
with or without blank spaces, for notations by students. 
(2)  Government  means  Central  Government,  State  Government  or  Government  of  the  Union 
Territories. 
(2) A Book or packet containing the books shall be transmitted under the "Gyan Post" subject to 
the following: 
(a) They shall not contain any publication, published at regular intervals; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 43 www.dakguru.com 
 
Illustration- Magazines, journal or similar publication issued at a regular interval of time weekly, 
fortnightly, monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly, half yearly and so- on. 
(b) Such packet containing the books shall bear on the outside the inscription "Gyan Post"; 
(c)  Books  shall  not  contain  any  advertisements  other  than  incidental  announcements  or  list  of 
books; 
(d) Each book in such packet shall contain the name of the printer or publisher; 
(e) No book of business or commercial in nature, shall be sent through this product; 
(f) No book in such packet shall bear any character or inscription reproduced by any means other 
than printing or manuscription: 
Provided that any such publication may contain in writing the name of the person to whom it is 
sent  or  presented,  the  date,  the  name  and  address  of  the  sender  or  owner  or  initials  of  a 
complimentary nature or signifying presentation. 
(g) No publication in such packet shall contain any price list or bills or orders for supply of the 
books: 
Provided that the packet may contain an invoice or a bill or both pertaining to publication being 
sent in that packet. 
(3) The items booked under "Gyan Post" shall be transmitted as trackable item. No item under 
Gyan Post category shall be transmitted as untracked or ordinary item. 
(4) The item posted as Gyan Post shall be address specific. 
(5) The packets booked under this category, shall be transmitted through surface mode. 
(6) The value-added service of registration, proof of delivery and insurance, may be availed by 
the sender on payment of applicable fees or charges. 
(7) The said item must have a delivery address and the sender's return address and are subject to 
inspection by the post office officers and officials. 
(8) Upon such inspection, matter not eligible for the processing under the Gyan Post product or 
in case of infringement of the conditions mentioned in (a) to (g) above, the packet sent under this 
product, shall be treated as an item posted through India Post Parcel - Retail product and charged 
on delivery with double the deficiency between the postage already paid for such packet and the 
postage payable for an India Post Parcel - Retail product item. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 44 www.dakguru.com 
 
(9) The minimum weight for booking packet under "Gyan Post" shall be three hundred gms. and 
the maximum weight for which packet under this product may be booked, shall be five kg. 
(10) The operational conditions for posting, booking, transmission and delivery of items under 
Gyan Post, shall be, as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
The rate for postage of Gyan post item (exclusive of applicable taxes) 
Weight of item Rate of postage (in Rs.) 
Upto 300 grams 20 
Between 301 to 500 gms 25 
Between 501 to 1000 gms 35 
Between 1001 to 2000 gms 50 
Between 2001 to 3000 gms 65 
Between 3001 to 4000 gms 80 
Between 4001 to 5000 gms 100 
 
93. Literature for blind. 
(1) Papers of any kind, periodicals, and books impressed in "Braille" or other special type for the 
use of  the  blind, shall  be  transmitted  by  post  as  "Literature for  the  Blind" items, provided  that 
they are posted in accordance with the following conditions, namely: 
(a) such items shall consist only of materials specially impressed as described above for the use 
of  the  blind,  and  shall  not contain  any communication  either in  writing or printed in ordinary 
type,  except  the  title  and  table  of  contents  of  the  book  or  periodicals,  and  any  key  to,  or 
instructions, for the use of the special type, or any enclosure except a label for the return of the 
packet; 
(b) such items shall bear on the outside the inscription "Literature for the Blind" and written or 
printed name and address of the sender; 
(c) such items shall be posted either without a cover, or in a cover open at both ends, which can 
easily be removed for the purpose of examination; 
(d) the weight of a "Literature for the Blind" item shall not exceed 7 kilograms; and 
(e) the dimensions of such item shall conform to the following maximum and minimum limits: 
(i) Maximum: 
 In roll form - Length 800 mm; Sum of length and twice diameter 1000 mm 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 45 www.dakguru.com 
 
 In other than roll form - 600 x 300 x 300 mm 
(ii) Minimum: 
 In roll form - Length 100 mm; Sum of length and twice diameter 170 mm 
 In other than roll form - 100 x 70 mm 
Explanation.- Plates bearing the characters of writing sound records for the use of the blind and 
discs, films, tapes and wires, on which spoken messages for the blind have been recorded when 
sent  by,  or  addressed  to,  an officially  recognised  institution  for  the  blind  shall  be  treated  as 
"Literature for the Blind". 
(2)  No  postage  shall  be  chargeable  on  the  literature  for  the  blind,  but  air  mail  fee  shall  be 
chargeable for transmission by air. 
(3) In case of infringement of any of the conditions mentioned in sub-regulation (1), the "Literature 
for the Blind" item shall be charged with double the postage as payable on relevant postal item, 
as applicable. 
94. Periodical Post. 
(1) Any publication may be transmitted by post as periodical post, if it is- 
(a)  covered  under  the  definition  of  the  term  "periodical"  under  the  Press  and  Registration  of 
Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023); 
(b) brought out, printed, or published in India only; 
(c)  registered  with  the  Press  Registrar  General  of  India  under  the  Press  and  Registration  of 
Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023) and possesses the certificate of registration allotted by the Press 
Registrar of General; and 
(d) comply with the provisions of the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023). 
Provided that a book, or a journal including a book or journal of scientific, technical and academic 
nature shall not be transmitted by post as periodicals. 
(2) No separate postal registration shall be required for transmission of periodicals by post. 
Provided that for the periodicals which are covered under the definition of newspaper and wish 
to  avail concessional  rate of postage for  transmission  by post,  a separate  postal  registration  or 
license is required to be taken by the owner or publisher (under the authority of owner). 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 46 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3)  The  periodical  shall  bear  in  print  on  any  convenient  place  either  on  the  first  or  last  page 
thereof, the superscription "Press Registrar of General of India under No.." 
(4) In case of infringement of any of the conditions specified in sub-regulation (1) and (3), the item 
shall be treated and charged as a book post item and any postage paid on it shall be taken into 
account in assessing the charges. 
(5) The rates of postage chargeable on periodical post shall be as mentioned as under - 
Periodical Post 
Value of Periodical Rate 
(i) From 1/- to 20/- 2/- for first 100 gms and part thereof, and 3/- for every additional 100 grams 
and part thereof 
(ii) From 21/- to 50/- 4/- for first 100 gms and part thereof, and 5/- for every additional 100 gms 
and part thereof 
(iii) 51/- and above 8/- for first 100 gms and part thereof, and 9/- for every additional 100 gms 
and part thereof 
 
95. Registered newspapers. 
(1)  A  newspaper  shall  be  eligible  for  postal  registration  for transmission  by  post  as  registered 
newspaper, if it is- 
(a)  covered  under  the  definition  of  the  term  "newspaper"  under  the  Press  and  Registration  of 
Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023); 
(b) brought out, printed, or published in India only; 
(c)  registered  with  the  Press  Registrar  General  of  India  under  the  Press  and  Registration  of 
Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023) and possesses the certificate of registration allotted by the Press 
Registrar of General; and 
(d) comply with the provisions of the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023). 
As per the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023, newspaper is defined as under: 
"Newspaper" means a periodical of loose-folded sheets usually printed on newsprint and brought 
out  daily or  at least once  in  a  week, containing information  on current  events, public  news or 
comments on public news. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 47 www.dakguru.com 
 
 The newspaper shall have been registered in the office of the Head of the Division  and 
Independent Gazetted Postmasters in jurisdiction in which it is published. 
 It is applied in application in the form prescribed along with two copies of the latest issue 
of  the  newspaper,  and  a  copy  of  valid  certificate  of  registration  issued  by  the  Press 
Registrar General. 
 Postal  registration  shall  be  granted  to  a  newspaper within 30  days from  the  receipt  of 
application form. 
 The date of the publication of the newspaper shall be printed on the first or last page. 
 The name of office of posting shall be printed mandatorily at convenient place in the back 
page top left corner of newspaper in such a manner that it is clearly visible. 
 The newspaper shall be posted at a place specified in application for postal registration, 
by its owner, manager or publisher on such day(s) of the week not exceeding seven days 
which may have been specified by him at the time of application for postal registration or 
at  any time subsequent  thereto subject  to  that it does  not  violate  the  conditions for  the 
newspaper. 
 Provided  that  in  case  the  date  of  posting  is  a  Sunday  or  a  gazetted  holiday,  facility of 
posting registered newspapers shall be available on the succeeding working day. 
 Provided that a prior intimation of two days shall be given to the Postmaster concerned 
in  case  any  change  is  desired  in  the  dates  or  days  of  posting  so  specified  or  in  case  of 
inability  to  publish  and  posting  the  newspaper  at  any  occasion  or  continuously  for  a 
specific period. 
 Provided further that the requirement of two days' prior intimation may be waived off by 
the Head of the Division or independent Gazetted Postmaster, if he is satisfied that the 
owner,  manager,  publisher  or  agent  could  not  adhere  to  it  for  the  reasons  beyond  his 
control. 
 Provided also that the number of days or dates on which an issue can be posted shall be 
altered  with  the  prior  approval  of  the  Head  of  Division  or  independent  Gazetted 
Postmaster. 
 Provided  further  that  a  newspaper shall, in  no  case,  be  published  and posted  less than 
half of its issues in a calendar year. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 48 www.dakguru.com 
 
 The publisher may post copies more than number of copies authorized to be posted only 
if two  days' prior  intimation,  in  writing,  is  given  to  the  postmaster  concerned.  No 
objection will be raised, if the number of copies posted is less than the number of copies 
authorized to be posted. 
 A  publisher  is  allowed  to  post  newspapers  at  a  place  outside  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Registering  Authority  Permission  for  such  posting  will  be  granted  by  the  Head  of 
Circle/Head of Region concerned under whose jurisdiction the requested place of posting 
after  satisfying  himself  about  the  genuineness  of  original  postal  registration  from  the 
Registration Authority. 
 In  cases  of  change  in  title  of  the  newspaper,  place  of  publication  within  or  beyond  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  current  registration  authority  ownership  of  a  newspaper  a  fresh 
registration shall be required by due procedure. 
 Provided  that  price  and  its  printing  on  the  newspaper  shall  not  be  mandatory  on  the 
newspaper published by Ministries/Department under the Government of India only 
 The  weight  of  a  registered  newspaper,  either  single  copy  or  packet,  shall  not  exceed 5 
kilograms. 
 The newspaper shall bear in print in any convenient place either on the first or last page 
the word "Registered "followed by the registration number which has been assigned to it 
by the Head of the Division and Independent Gazetted Postmaster 
 First registration shall be remained in force till 31st December of the third calendar year 
following  that  in  which  it  was  effected.  Every  subsequent  renewal  of  registration  shall 
remain in force for three calendar years. 
 Application for renewal of registration shall be made so as to reach the officer concerned 
at least three months before the date of expiry of the previous registration  and shall be 
accompanied by two copies of the latest issue of the publication of the newspaper. 
 No fee shall be payable for the renewal of registration or at the time of registration. 
 A late fee of Rs. 50/- shall be charged for each application for renewal received later than 
the last working day of the third calendar month preceding the last month of the period 
of previous registration. 
 Where  the  application  for  renewal  is  received  after  the  date  of  expiry  of  the  previous 
registration, a late fee of Rs. 100/- shall be charged with such application. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 49 www.dakguru.com 
 
 Postal  registration of  a  newspaper shall  be  renewed  within 15  days from  the  receipt of 
application form. 
 The newspaper applying for RNP must have some price and its printing on newspaper is 
mandatory. Provided that price and its printing on the newspaper shall not be mandatory 
on the newspaper(s) published by Ministries/Departments of Government of India only. 
 The Head of Circle/Head of Region grants the permission of posting without prepayment. 
 The  owner  or  publisher  who  intends  to  post more  than  500  copies of  registered 
newspapers at a time, is, by a valid licence, eligible to post newspapers without affixing 
postage confined to Registered Newspapers. 
 The  license  number  is  required  to  be  printed  along  with  the  words  "Licensed  to  post 
without  prepayment"  below  or  after  the  Postal  registration  Number.  The  licensee  may 
also use the abbreviated version, instead of the complete phrase as above, by substituting 
the phrase with the term "WPP" as prefix before the license number. 
 Security for WPP: - Equivalent to the total of one month postage as security deposit. 
 Bill for WPP: - 
o On 16th day of Month: - Posting of RNP between 1st to 15th 
o On 1st  day  of  Next  Month: - Posting  of  RNP  between  16th  to  end  of  previous 
month. 
 The payment of bill should be made by the licensee at the office indicated in bill within 7 
days. 
 In  the  event of  non-payment of  a  bill  within  a fortnight,  the posting of  the  Newspaper 
without  prepayment of  postage  will  be  immediately  be  stopped  the  licence  deemed  to 
have been cancelled. 
 If  any  dispute  arises  as to  the  effect of  the licence  or  with  regard  to  any  matter  arising 
therefrom, the same should be referred for a decision to the Member (Operations), whose 
decision shall be final. 
 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 50 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3) The rates of postage on registered newspaper are mentioned in as under - 
Item / Weight Slab Rate 
(a) In the case of a single copy of a registered newspaper: 
 
(i) For a weight not exceeding fifty grams 25 
paise 
(ii) For a weight exceeding fifty grams but not exceeding one hundred grams 50 
paise 
(iii)  For  every  additional one  hundred  grams or  fraction  thereof  exceeding  one 
hundred grams 
20 
paise 
(b)  In  the  case  of  more  than  one  copy  of  the  same  issue  of  a  registered  newspaper 
being carried in the same packet: 
 
(i) For a weight not exceeding 100 grams 50 
paise 
(ii)  For  every  additional one  hundred  grams or  fraction  thereof,  exceeding  one 
hundred gms. 
20 
paise 
Provided that such a packet shall not be delivered at any addressee 's residence but shall be given 
to a recognized agent at the post office. 
96. India post parcel. 
(1) The Post Office shall offer India post parcel to individual and bulk customers and all parcels 
shall be treated as accountable items. 
(2) Any item shall be treated as an India post parcel, if it complies with at least one of the following 
conditions, namely: - 
(a) which weighs more than 500 grams; or 
(b) which has minimum dimensions of: 
(i) 100 mm in roll form, sum of length and twice diameter 170 mm; 
(ii) 140 x 90 mm in other than roll form; With a tolerance of +2 mm; and 
(c) whose length does not exceed 1.5 metres and the length and girth combined does not exceed 
3 meters; and 
(d) whose gross weight does not exceed 35 kgs or volumetric weight as defined; 
Provided that where the item is not a letter item as defined in regulation sub regulation (1) of 87 
shall be declared as "merchandise" by the customer. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 51 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3) Any India post parcel presented at the window shall have the inscription "India Post Parcel" 
on it with such value additions as may be paid for, by the sender. 
(4)  The  postage  on  an  India  post  parcel  shall  be  fully  pre-paid  through  any  of  the  modes  of 
payment as mentioned in rule 9. 
 Note 1: Franking Impressions of such models of franking machines of vendors approved 
by the Director General shall be deemed to be mode of prepayment of postage on an item. 
 Note  2:  Nothing  contained  in  this  regulation  shall  prevent  the  booking  of  India  post 
parcels where the postage is collected at a later stage as permitted by the Director General. 
(5) India post parcel shall ordinarily be transmitted by surface only. 
(6) The value-added services, that is, addressee specific delivery, cash on delivery, insurance and 
proof  of  delivery,  shall  be  available  for  India  post  parcel  on  payment  of  a  fee  specified  by 
administrative instructions from time to time. 
(7)  All India post  parcels  shall  be  packaged  by  the  sender or  by  the  post office  as specified  by 
administrative instructions from time to time and any India post parcel not packed in conformity 
with specifications shall not be accepted for booking. 
(8)  If  any  India  post  parcel  in  the  course  of  transmission  through  post,  is  found  to  consist  of 
anything the transmission of which is in contravention of the provisions of the Act or the rules, it 
shall be detained at the post office nearest to the place at which it is detected shall be dealt in the 
manner as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(9) Every India post parcel addressed to any part of India shall be accompanied by a declaration 
in a form as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(10) All India post parcels shall be booked, transmitted and delivered in the manner as specified 
by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(11) The rates of postage chargeable on India post parcels are mentioned as under - 
India Post Parcels – Retail 
Weight Slab Rate 
(i) For a weight not exceeding five hundred grams ₹ 36.00 
(ii) For every five hundred grams or fraction thereof exceeding 500 gms. ₹ 16.00 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 52 www.dakguru.com 
 
India Post Parcels – Contractual 
Weight slab / 
Distance 
Local Within 
State 
Neighbouring 
State 
Other 
State 
Between 
Metro and 
State 
Capital* 
National 
Capital 
Region 
(NCR)** 
Up to 2 Kilograms Rs. 
45 
Rs. 80 Rs. 100 Rs. 115 Rs. 105 Rs. 70 
Every  additional  1 
Kg up to 5 Kg 
Rs. 
12 
Rs. 20 Rs. 25 Rs. 30 Rs. 25 Rs. 15 
Every  additional  1 
Kg above 5 Kg 
Rs. 
14 
Rs. 22 Rs. 28 Rs. 32 Rs. 28 Rs. 18 
* Provided it is not covered under within State or neighbouring State 
97. Logistic post. 
(1) The Circle Heads are authorised to specify, by administrative instructions, from time to time, 
the designated office and designated place where the items under "Logistics Post" may be booked 
at or addressed to. 
(2)  The  operational  conditions  for  posting,  booking,  transmission  and  delivery  of  items  under 
Logistics Post, shall be, as specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
 Logistics  Post  offer  a  range  of  integrated  distribution  solutions  including  door  to  door 
delivery,  warehousing,  pick  and  pack  facility,  distribution  and  returns  management.  It 
will  provide  end  to  end  supply  chain  management  to  the  customers  by  offering  value 
added services. 
 While  Speed Post  Parcel  and  India  Post  Parcel  handle  products  up  to  35  Kgs. Logistics 
Post books Parcels without any specific weight limit. The first slab under Logistics Post, 
for the purpose of calculation of tariff is 50 Kgs. 
Services offered: 
In addition to basic service comprising booking, transportation, unloading and delivery of goods 
at  India  Post premises  (Logistics  Post  Centre) following optional  Value  added  Services should 
also be available on payment of extra charges for each service. 
 Pick up 
 Loading 
 Door delivery, including unloading 
 Storage of goods before dispatch and or delivery 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 53 www.dakguru.com 
 
Tariff for Logistic Post: 
 Considering the hidden/unexpected cost that may creep in, Circle may decide the costing 
keeping at least 20% margin over the tentative Operational cost. However, Head of Circle, 
would have discretion to vary the margin freely where consignment weigh more than 100 
Kgs, as long as minimum margin of 10% is ensured. 
 All taxes/octroi/toll tax etc. would have to be paid by the consignor. 
 When booked under Logistics Post, each consignment would be charged for a minimum 
weight of 50 Kgs. 
 There  will  be  no  maximum  weight  limit,  but  Logistics  Post  Centers  can  refuse  articles, 
which cannot be carried by the means of transport available to them. 
Weight-volume relationship: 
 An article/consignment of the size/volume of 10 Cubic feet would be treated as equivalent 
to 50 Kgs. 
 Every additional cubic foot or part thereof would be treated as equivalent to 5 Kgs. 
 However,  for  the  purpose  of  charging,  higher  of  the  actual  weight  or  notional  weight 
worked out on volume basis, would be taken as the weight of the article/consignment. 
 The volume of different shapes like spherical, cylindrical, conical, rectangular, square etc. 
would  be  calculated  on  standard  mathematical  formulae,  which  would  be  supplied  by 
Circles to Logistics Post Centres. 
INSURANCE: 
 Head  of  Circle  may  enter  into  an  arrangement  with  third  party  insurance  company  to 
offer insurance for Logistics Post. 
 Limit of liability: The limit of liability per transit would be Rs. 1 crore. 
 The consignors would be free to insure their goods with either third party insurer engaged 
by  the  Department  of  Posts or any insurer. Department of  Posts  would not  be  liable  to 
compensate  either  the  consignor/consignee,  or  any  insurer.  Consignor  has  to  claim 
directly  from  the  insurance  provider.  This  should  be  made  clear  in  the  booking  cum 
delivery challan. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 54 www.dakguru.com 
 
 Logistics Post Centre will prepare a delivery challan in five copies, in Form B. The copies 
would  be  distributed  as  under:  Office  copy,  Consignor's  copy,  Driver's  copy,  Insurer's 
copy, Destination Logistics Post Centre's copy. 
DELIVERY: 
 The consignments would be deliverable at the Logistics Post Centres. Depending on the 
consignor's directions, the consignment may be delivery in one lot to one consignee, or to 
multiple persons as per directions of the consignor (in pre-packed and addressed cartons 
for the time being). 
 If  the  consignee  does  not  take  the  delivery  within 48  hours,  demurrage  charges, 
equivalent to double the charges for storage, shall be charged. 
98 : Speed Post 
 Speed Post Document and Parcel (Tariff per article) 
Weight Slab Local Upto     200 
Kms 
201  to  1000 
Kms 
1001  to  2000 
Kms 
Above    2000 
Kms 
Upto 50 grams ₹ 15 ₹ 35 ₹ 35 ₹ 35 ₹ 35 
51 grams to 200 grams ₹ 35 ₹ 35 ₹ 40 ₹ 60 ₹ 70 
201 grams to 500 grams ₹ 30 ₹ 50 ₹ 60 ₹ 80 ₹ 90 
Additional   500 grams   or 
part thereof 
₹ 10 ₹ 15 ₹ 30 ₹ 40 ₹ 50 
  NOTE:  The  table  above  reflects  the 2024  Regulations.  Please  note  that  tariffs  were 
revised effective 01.10.2025 as per the statutory update mentioned in the document below 
(next page). 
99. Speed Post Document : 
(1) Every speed post document shall be transmitted by air: 
Provided  that,  speed  post  document  may  be  transmitted  by  surface  on  routes  where  it  is 
determined to be faster than air transmission. 
(2)  The  weight  of  an  item  for  the  speed  post document  shall  not  exceed  500  grams  including 
volumetric weight. 
(3) The postage and other fees chargeable on the speed post document item, shall be charged in 
accordance with the volumetric weight or gross weight, whichever is higher. 
(4) The size of an item for speed post document shall not exceed the dimension of 420 mm, 297 
mm and 24 mm in respect of length, breadth and thickness, respectively. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 55 www.dakguru.com 
 
(5) The pick-up facility, proof of delivery, insurance, registration and other value-added services 
as specified  by  administrative instructions  from  time  to  time, shall  be  available  for  speed post 
item on payment of fees specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(6)  The  item  posted  under  the  speed  post  shall  generally  be  address  specific  that  is it  shall  be 
delivered at the given address, unless otherwise specified. 
 STATUTORY UPDATE: Speed Post Tariff Revision (Effective 01.10.2025) 
The  tariff  for  Inland  Speed  Post  (Documents)  was  revised  vide  Gazette  Notification  No.  4256 
dated 25.09.2025. The new rates are as follows (GST extra): 
Weight Local Up    to    200 
Km 
201-500 
Km 
501-1000 
Km 
1001-2000 
Km 
Above 2000 
Km 
Up to 50g ₹ 19 ₹ 47 ₹ 47 ₹ 47 ₹ 47 ₹ 47 
51g to 250g ₹ 24 ₹ 59 ₹ 63 ₹ 68 ₹ 72 ₹ 77 
251g to 
500g 
₹ 28 ₹ 70 ₹ 75 ₹ 82 ₹ 86 ₹ 93 
Note on Additional Weight: 
For every additional 500g or part thereof: 
 Local: ₹ 10 
 Up to 200 Km: ₹ 15 
 > 200 Km: Ranges from ₹ 30 to ₹ 50 depending on distance. 
Value Added Services: 
 Registration: ₹ 5* per item. 
 OTP Based Delivery: ₹ 5* per item. 
*Fee excluding GST 
100. Speed post parcel. 
(1) Sub-regulations (1), (2), (4), (6), (7) to (10) of regulation 96, relating to India post parcels shall 
apply mutatis mutandis to speed post parcels, except as follows: - 
(a) every speed post parcel shall be transmitted by air: 
Provided that speed post parcel may be transmitted by surface routes where it is determined to 
be faster than transmission by air: 
Provided further that speed post parcel, if transmitted by surface, shall be prioritised over India 
post parcel at every stage of transmission; and 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 56 www.dakguru.com 
 
(b) any speed post parcel presented at the window shall have the inscription "Speed Post Parcel" 
on it with such value additions as may be paid for, by the sender. 
101. Direct post. 
(1) Direct post shall be an un-addressed mail, comprising of unaddressed items like letters, cards, 
brochures, questionnaires, pamphlets, samples, promotional items, coupons, posters, mailers or 
any other form of printed communication that is not prohibited by the Act or these regulations. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this regulation, "mail" means printed matter usually carrying a 
sales message or announcement, designed to elicit a response from a carefully selected consumer 
or business market. 
Condition of Articles: 
 Minimum Quantity - 1000 
 Paper Size - A3 
 
(2) These items shall be accepted in bulk in designated post office and shall not be posted in a 
letter box. 
(3) In case of items meant for delivery in other towns, direct post items shall be accepted in Postal 
Index Number (PIN) Code wise bundles. 
(5) The rates chargeable on direct post are mentioned in Table. 
Postage on Direct Post 
DIRECT POST 
Weight Slab Local Rate Inter-City Rate 
First 20 grams Rs. 1.50 Rs. 2.00 
Every additional 20 grams or part thereof Rs. 1 Rs. 1 
 
102. Media post. 
(1) Media post shall be an advertising mechanism designed to help the Central Government or 
State Government and corporate clients for promoting their products and services as it offers a 
range of advertising mediums such as postal stationery and postal premises. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 57 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2) The advertisement shall be displayed at the area identified for advertisement in the premises 
of the post office. 
(3) Quantity Requirement: 
Medium Minimum Quantity 
Post Card 5 Lakh 
Envelopes 10 Lakh 
ILC 10 Lakh 
Saving Bank Passbook 1 Lakh 
Posters/Banners/Flex boards 10,000 
Letter Boxes 100 in any area/town 
MPCM Receipts 50 Lakh 
Hoardings Not Required 
MMS Not Required 
Agency  Commission:  Accredited  Agencies  are  eligible  for  15%  commission,  non-accredited 
agencies for 10% and individual for 5% on the media plan value. 
(4) The rates chargeable under media post are mentioned in Table. 
MEDIA POST 
Media Rate (per piece) Advertisement space (in cms) 
Post Card 
Single Colour: 10 paise 
Multi Colour: 20 paise 
9 x 6.5 Cm 
Letter Card 
Single Colour: 15 paise 
Multi Colour: 30 paise 
9 x 2.5 Cm 
Aerogramme 
Single Colour: 20 paise 
Multi Colour: 40 paise 
4 x 5.5 Cm 
Envelopes 30 paise 9 x 2.5 Cm 
Money Order Forms 10 paise 2 x 4.25 Cm 
Post Office Saving Bank Passbook 10 paise Back Cover of Passbook 
 
103. e-Post. 
(1)  e-Post  provides  facility  to  send  a  message  to  any  address  in  India  with  a  combination  of 
electronic transmission and physical delivery through a network of post offices. 
(2)  e-Post  sends  messages  as  a  soft  copy  through  internet and  at  the  destination,  it  will  be 
delivered to the addressee in the form of hard copy as an unaccountable letter item. 
(3) This facility is available for retail as well as for bulk customers: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 58 www.dakguru.com 
 
Provided that bulk customers shall enter into an agreement with the concerned authority of the 
Post Office for availing the e-Post facility. 
 Bill will be generated by system at the end of month and paid by customer on or before 
the last business day of the following month. 
 Penalty:  if  bill  is  not  paid  within  the  specified  time  penalty  @ 12%  per  annum on 
outstanding  amount  will  be  charged  subject  to  a  minimum Rs.100/-.  If  payment  is  not 
received  for two  consecutive  months,  the  e-post  service  will  be  suspended  for  the 
corporate customer and the outstanding amount will be recovered from Bank Guarantee. 
 Multiple language support - 11 languages are available (Hindi, Tamil, Malyalam, Odia, 
English, Assamese, Gujrati, Konkani, Sanskrit, Marathi, Manipuri). 
 Recharge  Validity: One  Year from  date  of  recharge.  If  unused,  the  wallet  must  be 
recharged  again  before  expiry  date  to  maintain  validity.  If  not  recharged  in  a  year  the 
wallet amount will be reset zero. 
 Preservation of record of ePOST: Record of ePOST will be preserved for 12 months. 
104. e-Payment. 
(1) e-Payment provides the services of collection of bill amount or other payments for third party 
through  post  offices  by  entering  into  an  agreement  with  the  concerned  authority  of  the  Post 
Office. 
(2) The operational conditions and fee relating to e-Payment shall be such as may be specified by 
administrative instructions from time to time. 
105. Retail post. 
(1) Retail post shall provide the sale of departmental and third party products or services with an 
aim to provide convenience to the general public by making these products or services available 
in their vicinity through post offices. 
(2)  Departmental  products  or  services  shall  be  such  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
(3) The third party products or services shall be offered through entering into an agreement with 
the concerned public sector and private sector entities. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 59 www.dakguru.com 
 
(4) The Circle Head is authorised to enter into an agreement with the concerned public sector and 
private sector entities on behalf of the Post Office. The period of agreement will be three years 
initially  and  later  it  can  be  extended  based  on  mutual  understanding  between  client  and 
department. 
(5) The charges on services to be provided under the retail post shall be such as may be specified 
by administrative instructions by the Post Office after taking into consideration the aspects of the 
service to be provided. 
(6) The Operational conditions for retail post shall be such as may be specified by administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
106. Magazine post. 
(1) Any publication may be transmitted by post as 'magazine post", if it is - 
(a)  covered  under  the  definition  of  the  term  "periodical"  under  the  Press  and  Registration  of 
Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023); 
(b) brought out, printed, or published in India only; 
(c) registered  with  the  Press  Registrar  of  General  of  India  under  the  Press  and  Registration  of 
Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023) and possesses the certificate of registration allotted by the Press 
Registrar of General; 
(d) adhere with the provisions of the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023 (51 of 2023); 
(e) have a bonafide list of at least 500 subscribers; and 
(f) posted with minimum 500 copies at a time. 
(2) Every magazine post shall be delivered to the address mentioned on the post as an accountable 
item. 
(3)  The facilities of cash  payment,  Book  Now  Pay  Later  (BNPL)  and  advance payment  may  be 
availed by the customer for payment of postage chargeable on the periodicals under the magazine 
post. 
(4) Registration - In the office of Divisional Head (Postal/RMS) with following documents: 
(a) two copies of the latest issue of the magazine; 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 60 www.dakguru.com 
 
(b) a certificate from the District Presidency or Sub-Divisional Magistrate confirming compliance 
with declaration requirement of the Press and Registration of Book Act 1867. 
(5)  The  initial  Registration  will  remain  in  force  until  December  31  of  the  third  calendar  year 
following the year it was registered. 
(6) Renewal - Application must be submitted at least one month before the expiration date. No 
fee is required for renewal however a late fee of Rs.5 will be apply for application received after 
the  last  working  day of  the  month  preceding  the  expiration.  Late  renewal  applications  will  be 
treated as fresh applications. 
(7) Booking - 
(a) Magazine Post must be booked from Press Sorting Office (PSO) L1 or L2 unregistered offices. 
(b)  The  magazine  post  must  display  both  registration  number issued  by  PRGI  (Press  Registrar 
General of India) and registration number issued by the Department of Posts. 
(c) A special series of barcodes starting with prefix MP will be provided to publishers. 
(d) Only One Magazine is allowed in one envelope. 
(e) Mobile number mention with address is mandatory of all subscriber. 
(8) Payment - 
(a) The following method can be chosen for payment. 
(i) Advance Payment: A minimum deposit of Rs. 1000 is required for single booking location and 
Rs.  10000  for  multiple  booking  location.  Booking  is  limited  to  amount  available  in  Advance 
deposit. 
(ii) Credit Facility: A  BNPL user id is provided  to  post  magazines from  identified  locations.  A 
security deposit of two billing cycle in the form of bank Guarantee. 
(9) Billing: 
 Monthly Billing will be conducted by Post Office. 
 Bills will be raised by 7th day of the following month and payment must be made by the 
last day of that month. 
 A penalty of 10% per annum for defaulting customers after one month from the due date 
until all dues are cleared. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 61 www.dakguru.com 
 
 Non-payment after two months will lead to forfeiture of the security deposit. 
(10) Delivery - Magazine post will be delivered to address specified on the post as accountable 
items. 
Maximum weight of Booking - 5 KG 
Rates for Magazine Post 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Up  to  200 
grams 
For   every   additional   100 
grams or part thereof 
(i) For  magazines  to  be  delivered outside the 
municipal area of the posting locations 
Rs 12/- Rs. 3/- 
(ii) For  magazines  to  be  delivered within the 
municipal area of the posting locations 
Rs 8/- Rs. 3/- 
 
CHAPTER VI 
INTERNATIONAL ITEMS AND SERVICES 
107. International post. 
(1) In the international post, letter post shall include items such as letters, postcards, aerogramme, 
printed  papers  (including  books  and  registered  newspapers,  small  packets,  literature  for  the 
blind, M Bag (Bulk Bag), and International Tracked Packet Service (ITPS). 
(2)  In  the  international  post,  "parcel  post"  shall  include  items  such  as  international  air  parcel, 
international surface airlifted parcels (SAL) and international surface parcels. 
(3)   Express   Mail   Service   (EMS)   shall   be   the  fastest  service  for  sending   documents  and 
merchandise worldwide. 
A. LETTER POST ITEMS 
108. Letters (International). 
(1) Letter, which may contain a communication  enclosed in an envelope and addressed with a 
weight limit up to 2 kgs, may be transmitted to or from addressees or senders in foreign countries 
or territories. 
(2) Letters shall conform to the following maximum and minimum dimensions, namely:- 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 62 www.dakguru.com 
 
(a)  maximum  dimensions:  length,  width  and  depth  combined:  900  mm,  but  the  greatest 
dimension may not exceed 600 mm, with a tolerance of 2 mm; 
 in roll form: length plus twice the diameter: 1,040 mm, but the greatest dimension  may 
not exceed 900 mm, with a tolerance of 2 mm; 
(b) minimum dimensions: surface measuring not less than 90 x 140 mm, with a tolerance of 2 mm; 
 in roll form: length plus twice the diameter: 170 mm: but the greatest dimension may not 
be less than 100 mm. 
(3) The rates of postage chargeable on letters (International) are mentioned as under - 
Basic Tariff for Air Letter-Post Items 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
Product 
Name of the 
Country 
Weight Slab Rate (in 
Rupees) 
1 Letters USA Upto First 20gms 32.00 
   
For   every   additional 20gms or 
thereof upto 2000 gms 
22.00 
  
For    all    countries 
except USA 
Upto First 20gms 25.00 
   
For   every   additional 20gms or 
thereof upto 2000 gms 
15.00 
 
109. Aerogramme. 
(1)  Aerogramme  which  is  a  priority  item  consisting  of  a  sheet  of  paper  suitably  folded  and 
gummed on all sides, shall be transmitted exclusively by air to or from addressees or senders in 
foreign countries or territories. 
(2) Aerogramme shall be sold by the post offices specified by the Circle Head: 
Provided that privately manufactured aerogramme shall not be transmitted by post. 
(3) Aerogramme shall conform to the following maximum and minimum dimensions, namely:- 
(a) the maximum size of an aerogramme shall not exceed 110 X 220 mm when folded and, in that 
form, its length shall be equal to or greater than its width multiplied by √2 (Approximate value: 
1.4); 
(b) the minimum size permissible for folded aerogrammes shall be same as for letters, i.e. 90 X 
140 mm. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 63 www.dakguru.com 
 
(4) The rates of postage chargeable on aerogramme shall be mentioned as under - 
Sr. No Name of Product Name of the Country Weight Slab Rate (in Rupees) 
1 Aerogramme For all countries Maximum 3 gms 20.00 
 
110. Post card (International). 
(1) Postcard is an open communication transmitted by surface, on a sheet of paper with maximum 
dimensions  of  120  x  235  mm,  with  a  tolerance  of  2  mm,  provided  they  are  sufficiently  stiff  to 
withstand processing without difficulties; and with minimum dimensions of 90 x 140 mm, with 
a tolerance of 2 mm. 
(2) Postcards, either issued by the Post Offices or manufactured privately shall be accepted for 
transmission to foreign countries or territory: 
Provided  that  privately  manufactured  postcards  shall  be rectangular  and  be  made  of  material 
and dimensions similar to those used for the postcards issued by the Post Office. 
(3) The rates of postage chargeable on postcard (International) shall be mentioned as under - 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
Product 
Name of the Country Weight 
Slab 
Rate (in 
Rupees) 
1 Post Card 
(Single) 
Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Bhutan 
 
8.00 
  
APPU  Countries  (except  Pakistan,  Nepal, 
Bangladesh and Bhutan) 
 
10.00 
  
UPU Countries (Except APPU) 
 
12.00 
111. Airmail Postcard. 
(1) Airmail postcard is a postcard which is transmitted by air. 
(2) The provisions of postcard as mentioned in sub-regulation (1) and (2) of regulation 110 shall 
be applicable to airmail postcard. 
(3) The rates of postage chargeable on airmail postcard shall be mentioned as under - 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
Product 
Name of the Country Weight 
Slab 
Rate (in 
Rupees) 
1 Airmail Post 
Card 
Pakistan,   Nepal,   Bangladesh   and 
Bhutan 
 
10.00 
  
Other Countries 
 
15.00 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 64 www.dakguru.com 
 
112. Small packet. 
(1) Letter post items which contain small quantities of goods such as gifts, items of saleable value, 
and samples of merchandise, may be transmitted by post, as small packets. 
(2)  Small  packets shall not  bear any inscriptions or contain  documents  in  the  nature of  current 
and personal correspondence or any document exchanged between persons other than the sender 
and the addressee. 
(3)  Small  packets  shall  conform  to  the  following  maximum  and  minimum  dimensions  and 
prescribed for letters, namely:- 
(a)  maximum  dimensions:  length,  width  and  depth  combined:  900  mm,  but  the  greatest 
dimension may not exceed 600 mm, with a tolerance of 2 mm; 
 in roll form: length plus twice the diameter: 1,040 mm, but the greatest dimension  may 
not exceed 900 mm, with a tolerance of 2 mm; 
(b) minimum dimensions: to have a surface measuring not less than 90 x 140 mm, with a tolerance 
of 2 mm; 
 in roll form: length plus twice the diameter: 170 mm: but the greatest dimension may not 
be less than 100 mm 
(4) Small packets shall have maximum weight upto 2 kg and minimum weight of 100 gms. 
(5) The rates of postage chargeable on small packets are mentioned as under - 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
Product 
Name of the 
Country 
Weight Slab Rate (in 
Rupees) 
1 Small 
Packets 
USA Upto First 100gms 115.00 
   
For  every  additional 100gms and 
part thereof upto 2000gms 
105.00 
  
For all   countries 
except USA 
Upto First 100gms 80.00 
   
For  every  additional 100gms and 
part thereof upto 2000gms 
70.00 
113. Printed papers. 
(1)  Letter  post  items  which  contain  only  newspapers,  may  be  transmitted  by  post  as  printed 
papers. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 65 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2) Several printed papers may be sent together in a single item provided that they shall not bear 
the names and addresses of different addressees. 
(3) Printed papers shall be made up in such a way that their contents are sufficiently protected 
while permitting quick and easy verification. 
(4) Printed papers shall have a maximum weight upto 2 kg and a minimum weight of 20 gms. 
(5) The rates of postage chargeable on printed papers are mentioned as under - 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
Product 
Name of the 
Country 
Weight Slab Rate (in 
Rupees) 
1 Printed 
Papers 
USA Upto First 20gms 35.00 
   
For   every   additional 20gms or 
thereof upto 2000 gms 
25.00 
  
For    all    countries 
except USA 
Upto First 20gms 27.00 
   
For   every   additional 20gms or 
thereof upto 2000 gms 
17.00 
 
114. M-Bag (Bulk bag). 
(1) M-Bag (Bulk bag) are special bags containing printed papers, newspapers, periodicals, books 
and similar printed documentation for the same addressee at the same address marked with the 
inscription "M" intended for transmission to or from addresses or senders in foreign countries or 
territory. 
(2) The maximum permissible weight of an M-bag is 30 kg. 
(3) Each M-Bag should be accompanied by Form CN22 or Form CN23 prepared by the sender; 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-regulation, "Form CN22" or "Form CN23" means the 
relevant forms specified in this behalf by the Universal Postal Union. 
(4) Every M-Bag shall be furnished with a rectangular address label provided by the sender and 
providing all the information concerning the addressee and the address label shall be made of 
sufficiently rigid material and shall not measure more than 90mm X 140mm. 
(5) The postage paid for the M-Bag shall be shown on the address label of the bag and the weight 
limits for M-Bags shall be up to 30 kg, which is subject to the maximum acceptable weight limit 
specified by the country or territory of destination, whichever is lower 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 66 www.dakguru.com 
 
(6) M-Bags may also contain other contents as under: 
(a) the contents (commercial samples shipped by manufacturers and distributors, or other non- 
dutiable  commercial  items  or  informational  materials  that  are  not  subject  to  resale)  are  as  list 
affixed to or otherwise combined with the accompanying printed papers; 
(b) the contents relate exclusively to the printed papers with which they are being mailed; 
(7) The rates of postage chargeable on M-Bag are mentioned as under - 
Sr. 
No 
Name of 
Product 
Name of the 
Country 
Weight Slab Rate (in 
Rupees) 
1 Mail Bag For all countries For a weight not exceeding 5 Kg 700.00 
   
Per  Kg.  or  part  exceeding 5  Kg. 
up to 30 Kg 
150.00 
 
115. Literature for blind (International). 
(1) Papers of any kind (including letters), periodicals, books and plates impressed in "braille" or 
any other special type for the use of the blind may be transmitted as literature for the blind (blind 
literature). 
(2) Sound records shall be admitted for transmission as literature for the blind only if these are 
sent  by,  or  addressed  to,  an  officially  recognised  institute  for  the  blind  and  a  list  of  such 
institutions in India shall be published from time to time. 
(3) The maximum weight for the blind literature shall be upto 7 kg. 
(4) The literature for the blind shall be exempted from postage but surface airlift or air surcharge 
may be availed by paying the applicable fee. 
116. International tracked packet service (ITPS). 
(1) The Circle Head is authorised to specify, from time to time, the offices where the item called 
as international tracked packet may be booked subject to the following conditions, namely: - 
(a) the maximum weight of an international tracked packet shall be 2 kg, provided that the said 
limit may be amended from time to time 
(b) the sum of the length, width and depth shall not exceed 90 cm and the largest dimension shall 
not exceed 60 cm. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 67 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2) An international tracked packet shall be booked, transmitted and delivered in the manner as 
may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(3) The discount and value additions to the customers for international tracked packet shall be 
provided in the manner as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
 STATUTORY  UPDATE: International  Tracked  Packet  Service  (ITPS) rates  were  revised 
significantly to boost exports (especially for e-commerce) vide notifications in 2025, with reduced 
rates for key destinations. ITPS is now available for 45+ countries including USA, UK, Canada, 
Australia, etc. 
B. PARCEL POST ITEMS 
117. International air parcel. 
(1) International air parcel provides economical and faster mode of transmission of documents 
and merchandise to all the Universal Postal Union member countries with track and trace facility. 
(2) International air parcel may be booked in the post offices as may be specified by administrative 
instructions from time to time, subject to the following conditions, namely: - 
(a)  the  maximum  gross  weight  of  an  international  air  parcel  shall  be  20  kg,  subject  to  the 
maximum acceptable weight limit specified by the country or territory of destination, whichever 
is lower or as amended from time to time; 
(b) the maximum dimension shall not exceed 1.5 metre or 3 meters for the sum of the length and 
the greatest circumference measured in a direction other than that of length. 
(3) No international air parcel shall be smaller than the minimum size prescribed for letters i.e. 90 
mm X 140 mm. 
(4) An international air parcel shall be booked, transmitted, and delivered in the manner as may 
be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
C. INTERNATIONAL SPEED POST SERVICES (EMS) 
118. International speed post. 
(1) International speed post, globally known as Express Mail Service (EMS), is a postal express 
service for transmission of documents and merchandise, and shall be the best possible quickest 
postal service by physical means. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-regulation:- 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 68 www.dakguru.com 
 
(a) "documents" includes documents of any kind containing information or data in alphabetical, 
numerical or technical form, which are not dutiable or saleable; and 
(b) "merchandise" includes any article or thing, other than documents transmissible by post, the 
insurance of which is not compulsory. 
(2)  International  speed  post  items  (EMS)  may  be  booked  from  all  the  post  offices  across  the 
country. 
(3) International Speed Post (EMS) may be availed subject to the following conditions, namely:- 
(a) the maximum gross weight of an international speed post shall be 35 Kg, which is subject to 
the  maximum  acceptable  weight  limit  prescribed  by  the  country  or  territory  of  destination, 
whichever is lower or as amended from time to time; 
Provided that the higher limit of weight of an international speed post service addressed to or 
from  any  other  country  or  territory  may  be  such  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions; 
(b) the size of an item for international speed post service shall not exceed 1.5 meter for any one 
dimension and 3 meters for the sum of the length and the greatest circumference measured in a 
direction other than the length; 
(c) discount and value additions to the customers for international speed post shall be provided 
as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time; 
(d) an international speed post (EMS) shall be booked, transmitted and delivered in the manner 
as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time; 
(e)  precious  metals  (including  gold, silver,  platinum or other precious  metals),  precious  stones 
(including  diamond  or  other  precious  stones),  jewellery  or  any  combination  of  these  whether 
manufactured or not, coins, bank notes, currency notes, securities of any kind payable to bearer, 
travellers' cheques, shall be transmitted by insured Express Mail Service, and the value of such 
insurance shall not exceed 1,00,000; 
Provided that the higher value of insurance may be specified in respect of any such item. 
D. COMMON REGULATIONS RELATED WITH INTERNATIONAL MAILS 
119. Booking. 
(1) The postage payable for international items are as mentioned in Schedule III. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 69 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2)  The  postage,  special  fee  and  air  surcharges  may  be refunded  to  the  sender  in  the  event  of 
suspension of services. 
 
 
120. Electronic advance data (EAD). 
(1)  Items  containing  goods  may  be  subject  to  specific  import  customs  and  security  based 
requirements for providing electronic advance data at the country or territory of destination. 
(2)  The  exchange  of  electronic  advance  data  may  be  additionally  governed  by  bilateral  or 
multilateral agreements or protocols regarding the protection of personal data and other technical 
aspects relating to data exchanges. 
(3)  Each  item  for  which  electronic  advance  data  is  provided  shall  be  accompanied  by  the 
appropriate customs declaration Form CN22 or Form CN23:- 
(a) CN 22- if the declared value of the international items less than or equal to 300 Special Drawing 
Rights (SDR); 
(b)  CN  23-If  the  declared  value  of  the  international  items  is  greater  than  300  Special  Drawing 
Rights (SDR), a CN 23 shall also be provided. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-regulation, "Form CN22" or "Form CN23" means the 
relevant forms specified in this behalf by the Universal Postal Union. 
(4)  The  sender  of  international  mail  is  required  to  provide  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC) 
documents   or   electronic   Know   Your   Customer   (eKYC)   documents   for   the   booking   of 
international mail containing merchandise. 
(5) The electronic advance data necessary to meet the requirements under this regulation shall, in 
all  cases,  replicate  data  documented  on  the  appropriate  Universal  Postal  Union  customs 
declaration form. 
(6)   Letters,   postcards,   printed   papers   (other   than   books)   or   letter-post   items   containing 
correspondence or items for the blind, which are not subject to customs duties, shall be exempted 
from electronic advance data requirements. 
(7)  Electronic  advance  data  adoption  requires  mandatory  submission  of  the  following  data 
elements,   known   as   the   7+1   dataset   to   comply   with   required   regulatory   and   security 
requirements: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 70 www.dakguru.com 
 
(a) Consignor name 
(b) Consignor address 
(c) Consignee name 
(d) Consignee address 
(e) Number of packages 
(f) Total gross weight (including measure unit qualifier) 
(g) Brief merchandise or cargo description 
(h) Identifier 
121. Packaging. 
(1)  All  items  shall  be  made  up  securely  and  in  such  a  way  that  there  is  no  risk  of  other  items 
getting trapped in the item and the packaging shall adapt to the shape, nature of the item and the 
condition of transport. 
(2) Every item shall be made up in such a way as not to affect the health of officials and so as not 
to  present  any  danger, if it  contains items  of  a  kind likely  to injure  the officials called  upon  to 
handle it or soil or damage other items or postal equipment. 
(3) The detailed conditions of packaging for international items including value added services, 
shall be as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
122. Delivery in country or territory of destination. 
(1)  Items  shall  be  delivered  in  the  country  or  territory  of  destination  in  accordance  with  their 
relevant laws or internal regulations. 
(2)  The  Post  Office  shall  not  be  responsible  for  the  manner  in  which  an  item  is  delivered  or 
returned undelivered, if it is done in accordance with the relevant laws or internal regulations of 
the country or territory of destination. 
(3) The period of detention of undeliverable items shall also be governed by the relevant laws or 
internal regulations of the country or territory of destination. 
E. OTHER FEATURES OF INTERNATIONAL MAIL ITEMS 
123. Other features. 
Any outward accountable item shall be presented to the post office and a receipt shall be given 
to the person who presents such item. 
124. Track and trace service. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 71 www.dakguru.com 
 
For  every  accountable international item,  electronic exchange of  data is  available  at item level, 
receptacle  level  and  airlines  level  to  facilitate  transparency  in  the  movement  of  items  and 
receptacles,  however,  for  registered  letter  items,  this  service  is  not  available  for  some  of  the 
destination as per the internal regulations of destination. 
125. Inward international mails. 
(1) The conditions for transmission of items by post shall be as may be specified by administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
Provided  that  the  regulations  relating  to  domestic  registered  newspapers  shall  be  deemed  to 
apply in the case of newspapers sent to any foreign country or territory. 
(2)  Any  inward  accountable  item  shall  not  be  delivered  to  the  addressee  unless  and  until  an 
authorised person has signed a receipt for it. 
126. Failure to take delivery. 
(1)  If  the  addressee of  an international  air parcel fails  to  take  delivery of it  within seven  days, 
following  the  date  of  its  first  presentation  or  the  date  of  delivery  to  him  or  to  the  authorised 
person of  an intimation of its  arrival,  a  demurrage  charges,  commencing from  the  eighth  day, 
shall be collected from the addressee at the time of delivery: 
Provided that in the case of an international air parcel, bearing an alternate address, if the parcel 
cannot be delivered at the original address, the demurrage charge due from the first addressee 
shall also be collected from the second addressee at the time of delivery. 
(2) If the addressee of- 
(a) an inward international packet (or bag) or printed papers; 
(b) an inward International small packet; or 
(c) an inward International insured letter or insured box 
fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the date of its first presentation or the date 
of delivery to him or to his authorised person of an intimation of its arrival, and if its weighs more 
than 500 grams, a demurrage charge commencing from the eighth day, shall be collected from 
the addressee at the time of delivery. 
(3)  The  demurrage charges  as  referred  in  sub-regulations  (1)  and  (2), shall  be  as  mentioned  as 
under – 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 72 www.dakguru.com 
 
 
 
 
Demurrage charges for international air parcel 
S. 
No. 
Description Demurrage charges 
1 Demurrage  charges,  commencing  from  the eighth  day,  to  be 
collected  from  the  addressee,  in  case,  the  addressee  of  an 
international air parcel fails to take delivery of it within seven 
days following  the  date of its first  presentation or  the  date of 
delivery to him or to his accredited agent of an intimation of its 
arrival 
Rupee   one   per   day 
(subject  to  maximum 
of twenty  four  rupees 
and fifty paise) 
2 Demurrage  charges,  commencing  from  the eighth  day,  to  be 
collected  from  the  addressee,  in  case,  the  addressee of  an 
international air parcel, addressed "Poste Restante" fails to take 
delivery  of  it  within seven  days following  the  date  of  its  first 
presentation or the date of delivery to him or to his accredited 
agent of an intimation of its arrival 
Rupees   one   per day 
(subject  to  maximum 
of forty rupees) 
3 Demurrage  charge,  commencing  from  the eighth  day,  to  be 
collected  from  the  addressee  at  the  time  of  delivery,  if  the 
addressee  of  (a)  an  inward  international  packet  (or  bag)  or 
printed papers or (b) an inward international small packet or (c) 
an  inward  international  insured  letter  or  insured  box,  fails  to 
take  delivery of it  within seven  days following  the  date of its 
first  presentation  or  the  date  of  delivery  to  him  or  to  his 
accredited agent of an intimation of its arrival, and if it weighs 
more than 500 grams 
Rupees ten per day 
4 Demurrage  charge,  commencing  from  the eighth  day,  to  be 
collected  from  the  addressee  at  the  time  of  delivery,  if  the 
addressee  of  (a)  an  inward  international  packet  (or  bag)  or 
printed papers, or (b) an inward international small packet, or 
(c)  an  inward  international  insured  letter  or  insured  box, 
addressed  "Poste  Restante"  fails  to  take  delivery  of  it  within 
seven  days following  the  date  of  its  arrival  in  the  office  of 
delivery, and if it weighs more than 500 grams 
Rupees ten per day 
 
127. Failure to take delivery of Post Restante parcel. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 73 www.dakguru.com 
 
(1) If the addressee of an international air parcel addressed "Poste Restante" fails to take delivery 
of  it  within  seven  days  following  the  date  of its  arrival  in  the  office  of  delivery,  a  demurrage 
charge,  commencing  from  the  eighth  day,  shall  be  collected  from  the  addressee  at  the  time  of 
delivery. 
(2) If the addressee of - 
(a) an inward international packet (or bag) of printed papers; or 
(b) an inward International small packet; or 
(c) an inward International insured letter or insured box, 
addressed "Poste Restante" fails to take delivery of it within seven days following the date of its 
arrival  in  the  office  of  delivery,  and  if  it  weighs  more  than 500  grams,  commencing  from  the 
eighth day shall be collected from the addressee at the time of delivery. 
CHAPTER VII 
UNIVERSAL POSTAL SERVICE 
128. Mail services under Universal Postal Service. 
The  Post  Office  shall offer  the following  products of  mails services  under  the  Universal Postal 
Services, namely: - 
(a) Domestic: 
(i) Letters 
(ii) Letter card 
(iii) Book Post 
(iv) Periodical Post 
(v) Registered Newspaper 
(vi) Literature for Blind 
(vii) India Post Parcel 
(viii) Post Card 
 
(b) International: 
(i) Letters 
(ii) Aerogramme 
(iii) Post Card 
(iv) Airmail Post Card 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 74 www.dakguru.com 
 
(v) Small Packet 
(vi) Printed Papers 
(vii) Literature for Blind 
(viii) International Air Parcel 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE 
129. On postal service. 
Items  of  any  class  on  the  service  of  the  Post  Office  by  officers  of  the  Post  Office,  Posts  Audit 
Officers and such other officers, as may be authorised in this behalf, shall be transmitted free of 
postage and all other postal fees. 
130. (1) The following items may be insured "On Postal Service", namely: - 
(a) items having intrinsic value; 
(b) important documents such as service book, Annual Performance Assessment Report (APAR) 
file, Official files, etc.; 
(c) documents related to investigation, vigilance cases, examination etc.; and 
(d) other important documents deemed fit to be sent as Insured Items. 
(2) The following items shall be registered "On Postal Service", namely: - 
(a) important official documents- Annual Performance Assessment Report (APAR), etc.; 
(b) items required to be sent through registered post such as charge sheets, etc.; and 
(c) other important documents deemed fit to be sent as registered items. 
(3) "On Postal service" shall not be available for items posted under speed post. 
131. Postal ballot or election material. 
(1)  The  election  material  tendered  by  the  Election  Commission  of  India  or  the  State  Election 
Commission shall be booked, transmitted and delivered in accordance with the procedure as may 
be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2) The provisions of sub-regulation (1) shall be equally applicable to postal ballots. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 75 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3) Every item referred to in sub-regulations (1) and (2) shall be deemed to be an official item for 
the purposes of this regulation and given priority accordingly. 
CHAPTER IX 
VALUE ADDED SERVICES 
A. DOMESTIC ITEMS 
132. Registration of domestic items. (Omitted) 
This  regulation,  which previously governed  the  standalone  "Registered  Post"  service,  has  been 
omitted. This legally formalizes the "abolition" of Registered Post as a separate product. 
Effective September  1,  2025,  the standalone Registered  Post service for  domestic  transmission 
has been discontinued and merged with Speed Post. Users requiring secure, recorded delivery 
must now use Speed Post (with optional registration value-added service). 
133. Insurance of domestic items. 
(1)  Any  accountable  item,  shall  be  insured  for  the  value  not  exceeding one  lakh  rupees at 
identified booking centres or post offices and on payment of such fee as mentioned as under - 
INSURANCE FEE (DOMESTIC) 
In addition to the postage and the fee for registration, the further fees chargeable for insurance is 
as under: 
Category Value Fee 
(i) For insurance of Speed Post parcels: 
(a) Insured value upto ₹200 ₹10 
(b) Insured value above ₹200 ₹10 + ₹6 for every additional ₹100 or 
fraction thereof 
(ii) For insurance of Items other than Speed Post Parcels: 
(a) When  the  value  insured  does  not  exceed 
₹200/- 
₹10/- 
(b) For   every   additional ₹100/- or   fraction 
thereof in excess of ₹200/- 
₹6/- 
 
(2)  Where  currency  or  bank  notes  are  dispatched  by  insured  post,  the  value  shall  not  exceed 
twenty thousand rupees. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 76 www.dakguru.com 
 
Provided that in no case such value shall exceed the real value of the contents of the item insured: 
Provided further that items containing precious metals (including gold, silver, platinum or other 
precious metals), precious stones (including diamond or other precious stones), jewellery or any 
combination of these in conformity with the definitions in the applicable law of the land for the 
time  being in  force or other  valuable contents, shall  be insured  and for  the  actual  value of  the 
contents. 
(3)  Insurance service  may  also  be provided  by  the  Post  Office  through  a  third-party  insurance 
provider as may be specified by administrative instructions. 
(4) The sender shall declare on the item, the actual value of the contents at the time of booking of 
the item. 
(5)  Items  to  which  the insurance  system is  applicable shall  be  those  which  contain  bank  notes, 
currency notes, bonds, coupons, securities, parcels containing valuables, and other documents of 
the kind. 
(6) Documents of value such as deeds, plans, contracts, autographs, rare manuscripts, may also 
be sent by insured post, provided that where documents have value by reason of the cost of their 
preparation, the insured value may not exceed the cost of replacing them in case of loss limited 
to the maximum limit of Post Office. 
(7)  Insurance  shall  cover  all  risks,  except  acts  of  God,  or  occurrences  such as  war,  riots,  civil 
commotions,  arrest  or  restrained  or  seizure  under  legal  process,  order,  restriction  or  any 
prohibition imposed by the Central Government, in the course of transmission by post. 
(8) The sender of an insured item under this regulation shall be entitled to obtain free of charge a 
proof of delivery of its delivery signed by the addressee or authorised person: 
Provided further that in case, if the proof of delivery does not reach the sender of the registered 
item,  then  a  certificate  of  delivery  shall  be  issued  by  Post  Master  or  officer-in-charge  of  the 
delivery post office, on  demand of  the customer  and  shall  be given  to  the sender  in  electronic 
form. 
(9) Items containing any of the following items may not be insured against damage, but they may 
be insured against loss only, on payment of fees on the same scale as those for insurance of other 
items  against  loss  or  damage,  that  is  to  say,  liquids  and  substances  which  easily  liquefy, 
perishable items and fragile items, such as, china glassware, millinery, gramophone records, etc. 
(10) The sender of an item may waive his claim to compensation in favour of the addressee. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 77 www.dakguru.com 
 
(11)  The  detailed  conditions  of  packaging  for  insured  items  shall  be  as  may  be  specified  by 
administrative instructions from time to time. 
(12) Compensation in respect of insured items shall be payable as mentioned in regulation 74. 
134. Airmail service. 
Items intended to be posted for transmission by air, shall be charged an airmail fee, in addition 
to the postage and other fee payable under the regulations, as mentioned as under - 
Air Mail fee (Domestic) 
Air  mail  fee  chargeable  in  addition  to  the  postage  and  other  fee  payable  on  items  posted  for 
transmission by air at any post office in India: 
 ₹ 2/- for the first fifty grams or fraction thereof, and 
 ₹ 1/- for every additional fifty grams or fraction thereof. 
135. Cash on delivery (COD) items. 
(1) Cash on delivery shall be made available by the Post Office for a fee as mentioned in following 
table, where an amount is to be recovered from addressee on delivery of such item and shall be 
remitted to the sender in the manner as may be specified by administrative instructions. 
(2) Cash on delivery may be availed for items, subject to the following conditions, namely: - 
(a) retail customers and customers shall sign an agreement with the concerned authority of the 
Post Office; 
(b)   the   amount   specified  for   recovery  from   addressee  shall   be   as   may   be  specified   by 
administrative instructions from time to time; 
(c) such items do not contain any prohibited items; and 
(d) insurance of Cash on Delivery items may be availed by sender. 
136. Proof of delivery. 
(1) The sender of any domestic accountable item may request for a proof of delivery, which shall 
be  provided  to  him  or  her  on  delivery  of  the  item  on  payment  of  fees  as  mentioned  in  the 
following Table in addition to the postage or fees for any other value-added service. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 78 www.dakguru.com 
 
A  new  regulation  was  added  to  introduce OTP-based  delivery as  a  formal  value-added 
service. 
 
PROOF OF DELIVERY 
 Fee payable on proof of delivery of items: Rupees ten per item in addition to postage and 
other applicable fee. 
(2) The proof of delivery, shall be signed in ink by the addressee or an authorised person, or if the 
addressee refuses to so sign, shall be accompanied by statement to the effect that the addressee 
or his duly authorised person has refused to so sign: 
Provided  that  the  Director  General  may  specify  by  administrative  instructions  other  means  of 
recording proof of delivery and sharing the same with the sender. 
(3) In case of a physical proof of delivery, the same shall be processed as an accountable item. 
(4) The sender may obtain an attested copy of the original receipt on payment of prescribed fee, 
in a manner as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time: Provided that 
no such fee shall be charged on blind literature item. 
137. Services relating to pre-mailing activities. 
Every  post  office  shall  provide  pre-mailing  activities,  which  may  include  printing,  collection, 
addressing and franking on various items as may be specified by administrative instructions from 
time to time and at the rates mentioned in Table V of Schedule IV. 
B. INTERNATIONAL ITEMS 
138. Registration of international items. 
(1) Letters, post cards, small packets, printed papers, aerogrammes, literature for the blind and 
M-Bag may be registered at any post office for transmission to countries or territories and places 
served  by  the  Post  Office,  subject  to  such  exceptions  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
(2)  Provisions  relating  to  the  registration  of  domestic  items,  shall  be  equally  applicable  to 
registered items sent or received by the foreign post. 
(3) In addition to the postage, a fee shall be charged for the registration of the international items. 
Provided that no fees shall be payable for the registration of a blind literature packet. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 79 www.dakguru.com 
 
139. Insurance of International items. 
(1) International letter post, parcel post and express mail service items may be insured at any post 
office: 
Provided that letter post item tendered for insurance, not required to be registered. 
(3)  Insurance service  may  also  be provided  by  the  Post  Office  through  a  third-party  insurance 
provider as may be specified by administrative instructions. 
140. International items with precious metals. 
(1) An item containing precious metals (including gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals), 
precious  stones  (including  diamond or other precious  stones), jewellery or  any combination of 
these,  whether  manufactured  or  not,  coins,  bank  notes,  currency  notes,  securities  of  any  kind 
payable   to   bearer,   travellers'   cheques,   except   as   otherwise   specified   by   administrative 
instructions, shall not be accepted for transmission by post, unless the sender also agrees to insure 
it at the actual value of the content, as specified by administrative instructions. 
(2) Where an international insured letter post, parcel post, or express mail service item containing 
objects as mentioned in sub-regulation (1), is addressed to a country or territory where insurance 
is not available, such items shall be insured for its domestic transit within the limits of India for 
the actual value of the content. 
(3)  If  an  uninsured  international  item,  declared  to  contain  or  manifestly  containing  any  of  the 
objects of the value specified in sub-regulation (1), is received from a foreign country or territory, 
the  parcel  shall  be  forwarded  to  the  destination  and  delivered  to  the  addressee  subject  to  the 
payment of a fee for insurance on the declared value of the contents, or on the value assessed by 
the customs authorities, whichever is higher: 
Provided that such item is refused by the addressee, it shall be returned to the country or territory 
of origin. 
141. Redirected or returned international item. 
Where an insured international parcel, which has been redirected or returned as undeliverable, 
is received in India subject to a fresh insurance fee by reason of its having been so redirected or 
returned, such fee shall be recoverable on delivery, as if it were postage due. 
 
142. Compensation payable. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 80 www.dakguru.com 
 
(1) When an international letter post or parcel post, has been posted in and insured by the post 
office  and  when  such  letter  or  parcel  has  been  lost,  or  the  contents  thereof  have  abstracted  or 
damaged  in the  course  of  transmission  by  post,  compensation  not  exceeding  the  amount  for 
which such letter or parcel has been insured, shall be payable to the sender except in the case of 
a parcel in respect of which the administration of the country or territory of destination decides 
to pay compensation to the addressee under the same: 
Provided that no compensation shall be paid in respect of letter post, parcel post or express mail 
service item sent by or addressed to - 
(a)  a  prisoner  of  war,  either  directly  or  through  a  National  Information  Bureau  or  Central 
Information Agency referred to in Geneva Convention of the 12th August, 1949, relating to the 
treatment of prisoners of war; 
(b) a belligerent, received and interned in a neutral country; 
(c) a civilian internee, as defined in the Geneva Convention of the 12th August, 1949, relating to 
the protection of civilian persons in time of war, either directly or through a National Information 
Bureau or in Central Information Agency referred to in that Convention; and 
(d) a National Information Bureau or a Central Information Agency regarding prisoners of war. 
(2)  Whenever  an addressee has  made  reservations  at  the  time of  taking  delivery of letter post, 
parcel post or express mail service items, the contents of which have been abstracted or damaged, 
or has, after taking delivery thereof, immediately made a complaint of abstraction or damage to 
the  administration of  the office of  delivery  and proved  that  the  abstraction or  damage  did  not 
take  place  after  the  delivery,  the  compensation  payable  shall  be  payable  to  the  sender  and  no 
claim for the payment of compensation to the addressee shall be entertained. 
(3)  When  a  letter  post,  parcel  post  or  an  express  mail  service  item  insured  by  a  foreign 
administration is lost, or the contents thereof are abstracted or damaged, compensation shall be 
payable by the Indian Post Office to the addressee up to an amount not exceeding that for which 
it  has  been  insured,  if  he  claims  such  compensation  after  having  made  reservation  in  taking 
delivery and if he furnished proof that the sender has waived his rights to such compensation in 
favour of the addressee. 
(4)  The  compensation  payable,  in  no  case,  exceeds  actual  value  of  the  item,  insured  value,  or 
amount of loss occasioned by the abstraction of, or damage to, the contents of the item, whichever 
is lower and any resultant loss of profits or other indirect loss shall not be taken into consideration 
in the assessment of such compensation. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 81 www.dakguru.com 
 
143. Surface airlift and air surcharge. 
(1)  Letters, small packets,  printed  paper, literature  for  the  blind, post card,  and M-bag  may  be 
accepted at any post office for transmission 
(a)  by  surface  airlifted,  subject  to  such  exceptions  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions, on payment of fee for surface airlift as mentioned in following Table 
(b)  by  air,  subject  to  such  exceptions  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative  instructions,  on 
payment of fee for air surcharge as mentioned in above Table. 
(2) The fee specified in sub-regulation (1) shall be chargeable in addition to the postage and other 
applicable fee or charges. 
144. Advice of delivery. 
(1) The sender of a registered letter-post item, international air parcel, insured item, or express 
mail service item posted in India and addressed to any country or territory shall be entitled to 
apply for advice of delivery in the form CN 07 at the time of posting by paying a fee, in addition 
to the postage and other fee, at the rates as mentioned in following Table. 
Fees for Advice of Delivery (International) 
Destination Rate 
For Bhutan and Nepal Rs. 10 
For other foreign countries Rs. 20 
 
Explanation.- For  the  purposes  of  this  sub-regulation,  "Form  CN07"  means  the  relevant  forms 
specified in this behalf by the Universal Postal Union. 
(2) When the sender enquires about an advice of delivery of an item which is not received within 
the normal period, as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time, no fee 
shall be collected for inquiries and requests for information. 
(3) When the sender of such item posted in India and addressed to any country or territory who 
is a member of Universal Postal Union, has not paid the fee for advice of delivery and desires to 
have an enquiry made by the Post Office regarding the disposal of item, he shall be entitled to 
this service without any charge. 
(4) The advice of delivery of the items referred to in this regulation shall be returned to the sender 
by the quickest means which includes electronic exchange of advices of delivery. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 82 www.dakguru.com 
 
CHAPTER X 
MONEY REMITTANCE SERVICES 
A. DOMESTIC 
145. Domestic money order. 
(1) Money order (MO) shall be an order issued by the Post Office for the payment of a sum of 
money to the person in whose name the money order is sent, by the remitter. 
(2)  The  maximum  amount for which a single  money order  may  be issued shall  not  exceed  ten 
thousand rupees and shall not include a fraction of a rupee: 
Provided that total amount remitted through retail money order to a person in a month shall not 
exceed twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(3) A commission payable on the issue of money order shall be charged at the rate as mentioned 
in following Table 
MONEY ORDER 
Commission chargeable on Money Order shall be as under: - 
 For every twenty rupees of the amount of remittance or fraction thereof: ₹ 1 
(4) The remittance of money through money order shall be made free of charge without payment 
of commission thereof for transmission of amount of contribution to the Prime Minister's Relief 
Fund, PM CARES Fund (Prime Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situation 
Fund) or  Chief Minister's  Relief  Fund, or  any other such fund  as  may  be  notified from  time  to 
time. 
(5) Nothing in sub regulation (3) shall prevent transmission of service money order free of charge 
as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
146. Period of currency of money order. 
The currency period of the money order shall expire upon the end of the last day of the second 
month following the month of issue. 
147. Categories of money order. 
The money order shall be booked under the following categories, namely: - 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 83 www.dakguru.com 
 
(a)  retail  money  order  under  which  money  shall  be  remitted  from  a  person  to  another  person 
within the country; 
(b) bulk money order under which money shall be remitted in the following cases: 
(i) where money is remitted by one person to many persons; or 
(ii) where money is remitted from many persons to one person; and 
(c)  service  money  order  under  which  money  shall  be  remitted  for  departmental  or  official 
purposes. 
148. Booking of money order. 
(1)  The  money  order  form  as  specified  by  administrative  instructions,  duly  filled  in  by  the 
remitter, together with the amount of the money order and the commission payable and in case 
of money order referred to in of clause (b) of regulation 147 along with a valid identification proof, 
may be submitted by the remitter for availing the money order service. 
(2) A receipt shall be given to the remitter for the amount paid by him on account of the money 
order and the commission thereof. 
149. The remitter of a money order shall be entitled to obtain, free of charge,- 
(a) an electronic intimation of the payment of the amount of the order in shape of short messaging 
service or any other digital mode; and 
(b)  a  certificate  of  payment  on  the  request  of  the  remitter, subject  to  such  request  being  made 
within three months from the date of booking. 
150. Payment of money order. 
(1) The payment of a money order shall ordinarily be made at the address of the payee - 
(a) to the payee; or 
(b) to any person authorised by the payee. 
(2)  If  the payee of  a  money order is  a  minor or illiterate, or  his physical or  mental condition  is 
such rendering him incapable of providing acquittance of having received the money, then the 
identity of  the  payee  for  the  payment shall  be  verified  in such  manner  as  may  be specified  by 
administrative instructions by the Director General from time to time. 
151. Redirection of money order. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 84 www.dakguru.com 
 
(1)  A  money order  may  be  redirected  to  another address of  payee, free of charge,  if the payee 
makes a request, as specified by administrative instructions along with the proof of identity. 
(2) No alteration in the name of payee shall be permitted in the money order. 
(3)  A  money order  may  be stopped  and  returned  to  the  remitter, free of  charge,  if  the  remitter 
makes a request, as may be specified by administrative instructions, until the delivery post office 
issues  it  to  the  postman  for  the  delivery,  and  in  such  a  case,  the  amount  of  the  money  order, 
excluding the commission thereof, shall be refunded to the remitter. 
(4)  In  no case,  the  Post  Office  shall  be  responsible  for inability or failure  to stop payment of  a 
money order as per remitter's request. 
(5) If the payee of a money order refuses to take payment on its presentation to him, the amount 
of the money order shall be returned to the remitter excluding the commission thereof: 
Provided that if the payee who is unable to take payment on its presentation to him, makes an 
application, as may be specified by administrative instructions for retention of the money order 
or  the  payee  is  not  found  at  the  address  given  on  the  money  order,  the  money  order  shall  be 
retained in the post office for a period not exceeding seven days from the date of its presentation 
to the payee, or from the date it is sent out for payment, as the case may be, and if the payee fails 
to take payment of the money order from the post office within the said period of seven days, the 
money order shall be returned to the remitter on the first working day immediately following the 
expiry of the said period of seven days. 
(6) If the payee of money order is dead, the amount of the money order shall be returned to the 
remitter: 
Provided that the remitter of money order is dead, the amount of money order shall be paid to 
the legal heir of the remitter, as may be specified by administrative instructions. 
152. Exemption from liability of Post Office in respect of money order. 
(1) The Post Office shall not be responsible for the wrong payment of a money order by incorrect 
or incomplete information given by the remitter as to the name and address of the payee. 
(2) After a money order has been paid, to whosoever it is meant for payment, the Post Office shall 
not be liable to any further claim. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 85 www.dakguru.com 
 
153. Undelivered Money Order. 
The  undelivered  money  order  shall  be returned  to  the  remitter  and  the  amount  of  the  money 
order shall be paid to the remitter excluding the commission thereof. 
154. Void money order. 
When, for any reason, a money order remains unpaid, either to the payee or the remitter, at the 
end of the second month following the month of its issue, it shall be treated as void by the office 
of issue. 
155. Forfeiture of money order amount. 
The amount or value of money order unpaid beyond three years from the date of booking shall 
be forfeited and after expiry of the said period, such amount or value shall be treated as revenue 
to the Government of India. 
156. Suspension of service. 
The  services of  money orders  by  any particular post office, or group of post offices,  in special 
circumstances, may be suspended by the Circle Head, by order in writing. 
157. Postal order. 
(1) The amount for which a single postal order may be issued shall be in the denomination of ten 
rupees, twenty rupees, fifty rupees or one hundred rupees. 
(2) The amount for which an electronic -Indian postal order shall be issued is ten rupees. 
(3) The commission charged in respect of a postal order shall be as mentioned in Table 
POSTAL ORDER 
Commission chargeable on Postal Order shall be as under: - 
Sl No Value Commission 
1 For ₹ 10 ₹ 1/- 
2 Upto ₹ 20 ₹ 2/- 
3 Upto ₹ 50 ₹ 5/- 
4 Upto ₹ 100 ₹ 10/- 
(4) Broken amounts may be made up by affixing unused postage stamps, not exceeding four in 
number on the face of the postal orders, or where the space on that side is not adequate on the 
reverse thereof: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 86 www.dakguru.com 
 
Provided that the total of stamps affixed on each order shall not exceed nine rupees and the total 
amount payable on the order shall not exceed one hundred rupees. 
(5)  The  person  to  whom  a  postal  order  is  issued  shall,  before  parting  with  it,  fill the  name  in 
English  or  any  other  language  mentioned  in  Eighth  Schedule  to  the  Constitution  and  is 
recommended to fill in the name of the office of payment as a precaution against the order being 
lost or stolen. 
(6) Even where a postal order is crossed with a view to the payment through a bank, the name of 
the payee shall be filled in. 
158. Currency period. 
(1)  The  postal  orders  presented  within  twenty-four  months  from  the  last  day  of  the  month  of 
issue, are encashable without second commission. 
(2) Where postal order is not presented for payment within twenty-four months from the last day 
of the month of issue, a second commission at the rate mentioned in Table II of Schedule V, shall 
be charged, which shall be paid in postage stamp affixed to the back of the postal order or through 
cash receipt. 
159. Forfeiture. 
A postal order presented beyond thirty-six months after the last day of the month of issue shall 
be forfeited and shall not be paid. 
160. Repayment of postal order. 
(1)  The  purchaser  of  a  postal  order  shall,  within  twenty-four  months  from  the  last  day  of  the 
month of issue, be entitled to obtain repayment of its value, but not the commission, on presenting 
the postal order and the counterfoil at the post office from which the postal order was purchased. 
(2) The purchaser shall also be entitled to repayment of its value after twenty-four months but 
not after thirty-six months from the last day of the month of issue, provided a second commission 
at the rate as mentioned in Table II of Schedule V, is paid. 
(3)  Should  the  order  have  been  crossed  for  payment  through  a  bank,  the  purchaser  shall  first 
cancel the crossing by writing across the face of the postal order the words "please pay cash" and 
add his initials. 
(4) After a postal order has once been paid to the payee, the Post Office shall not be liable for any 
further claim. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 87 www.dakguru.com 
 
161. Payee's name essential. 
A postal order shall not be paid even though presented for payment by a bank unless the name 
of the payee is inserted in the body of the postal order. 
162. Payment through bank. 
If a postal order is crossed, payment shall be made only through a bank, and if the name of the 
bank is added, payment shall be made only through that bank. 
163. Payment of crossed postal order. 
If a postal order which is crossed with or without name of the bank, is presented for payment by 
or through a bank, with the name of such bank written or stamped upon the face thereof, that 
name may be accepted as a sufficient receipt for the amount of the postal order, and the postal 
order may be paid without any other receipt. 
164. Mutilated postal orders. 
If any erasure or alteration is made, or if the postal order is cut, defaced or mutilated, payment 
thereof may be refused. 
165. Electronic postal order. 
The provisions mentioned in sub-regulation (2) of regulation 157 and regulations 158 and 159 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to the electronic postal order. 
B. INTERNATIONAL 
166. Foreign money orders. 
(1) Foreign money orders shall be of the following categories, namely: - 
(a) electronic money order; and 
(b) Pos transfer through International Financial System or Universal Postal Union Interconnection 
Platform (UPU-IP). 
(2) The countries and territory with which money orders of each kind are exchanged by entering 
into  bilateral  or  multilateral  agreements,  shall  be  such  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative 
instructions from time to time. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 88 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3)  The  foreign  money  order  agreement  with  partner  postal  countries  or  territories  may  be 
activated or deactivated by the Central Government. 
(4) Every foreign money order shall be booked on the payment of the amount to be remitted along 
with the fee for the service as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(5) The operational and other general conditions for exchange of foreign money orders between 
two partner countries or territories shall be determined by the Central Government from time to 
time. 
(6) The maximum and minimum amount, and number of remittances made by a remitter through 
money orders in a calendar year shall be such as may be specified by administrative instructions 
from time to time. 
167. Advice to remitter of foreign money order. 
The  remitter of  a foreign  money order  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  an  advice of  its payment  by 
paying a fee as may be specified by administrative instructions and such fee shall be in addition 
to the fee chargeable on the foreign money order. 
168. Remitter to change name or address for payment. 
(1) The remitter of a foreign money order may, by payment of second fee, change the name or 
address of the payee, until the money order is paid at the destination, as per the conditions as 
may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2) The remitter may stop the payment of the foreign money order, if not paid, and may request 
that  the  remitted  amount  be  returned  to  them  as  per  the  conditions  as  may  be  specified  by 
administrative instructions from time to time. 
(3) The Post Office shall, in no case, be held liable for inability to fulfill the request of the remitter 
under sub-regulations (1) and (2), but, in such cases, the second fee shall be refunded. 
169. Inward foreign money orders. 
(1)  The  payment  of  inward  foreign  money  orders  shall  be  as  provided  for  domestic  electronic 
money orders, except otherwise specified by administrative instructions. 
(2)  A  foreign  inward  money  order,  being  undeliverable,  shall  be  returned  to  the  country  or 
territory of origin. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 89 www.dakguru.com 
 
(3) A foreign outward money order, on being returned by the country or territory of destination 
as undeliverable, shall be returned to the remitter. 
(4) In the event of inability to return the money order to the remitter, money order shall be dealt 
with as per the relevant provisions of regulations 154 and 155. 
CHAPTER XI 
BUSINESS SOLUTIONS 
A. BOOK NOW PAY LATER 
170. Book now pay later facility. 
(1) The corporate customers, who sign an agreement with the concerned authority of a post office, 
shall be eligible for the credit facility in respect of postage and other fee or charges on the items, 
as specified by administrative instructions, under the book now pay later (BNPL) facility. 
Explanation:  For  the  purposes  of  this  sub-regulation  "corporate  customer"  means  anyone  who 
provides minimum business worth of postage and other fee or charges on the items, in a calendar 
month at a booking office at single or multiple locations, as may be specified by administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
(2) The Regional Head shall be authorised to relax the limit of providing the monthly business of 
postage and other fee or charges, subject to such conditions as may be specified by administrative 
instructions from time to time. 
(3)  The  eligibility  for  customers  seeking  book  now  pay  later  (BNPL)  facility  with  booking  at 
multiple  locations  within  a  circle  or  region  shall  be  the  monthly  business  comprising  all  the 
locations, as specified by administrative instructions from time to time: 
Provided that, in exceptional cases, the limit in such cases may be relaxed with the approval of 
the Circle Head or, as the case may be, the Regional Head. 
 
171. Authority authorised to approve. 
(1) The Divisional Head shall be authorised for approving the enrolment of corporate customer 
under credit facility and to specify, from time to time, the designated office and designated place 
where the items of such customer, availing the credit facility may be booked at or addressed to 
in respect of all other cases falling under their jurisdiction. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 90 www.dakguru.com 
 
(2)  In  case  of  general  post  office  (GPO)  or  Class  1st  head  post  office  (HO),  the  powers  of  the 
Divisional Head under sub-regulation (1) may be exercised by the Director or Chief Post Master, 
as the case may be. 
(3)  The  Circle  Head  or  Regional  Head  of  respective  circle  or  region  shall  be  the  approving 
authority for cases involving customer seeking book now pay later (BNPL) facility with booking 
at multiple locations within a circle or region. 
B. NATIONAL ACCOUNT FACILITY (NAF) 
172. National account facility. 
(1) The customers having requirement of posting their items from more than one circle, shall be 
eligible for the national account facility in respect of postage and other fee or charges on the items, 
as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(2)  The  eligibility  and  process  of  application  for  enrolling  the  customer  under  the  national 
accounting facility shall be as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
C. ADVANCE PAYMENT 
173. Advance payment facility. 
(1) The contractual customer, who enter into an agreement with the concerned authority of a post 
office, shall be eligible for availing advance payment facility in respect of postage and other fee 
or  charges  on  the  items,  as  may  be  specified  by  administrative  instructions,  provided  that  the 
booking data are made available to the booking office by such customer in the specified electronic 
format. 
(2) The eligibility and process of application for enrolling the customer under advance payment 
shall be as may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
 
 
Administrative Instructions on BNPL Discount Structure (from 2024 Regulations): 
Volume Discount 
The  following  discount  structure  will  be  available  to  contractual  customers  of  Speed  Post 
document & Parcel (domestic) and India Post Parcel: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 91 www.dakguru.com 
 
Monthly Revenue 
Speed Post Document 
(Domestic) &  
Speed Post Parcel 
India Post Parcel 
Rs 50,001/- to 5,00,000/- 10% 7% 
Rs 5,00,001/- to 25,00,000/- 15% 10% 
Rs 25,00,001/- to 100,00,000/- 20% 13% 
Rs 100,00,001/- to 500,00,000/- 25% 16% 
Above Rs 500,00,000/- 30% 20% 
 1%  additional  discount will  be offered  to  those contractual customers  who  either  avail 
advance deposit facility or make payment at the time of booking. 
 In case monthly revenue is more than Rs. 25 lakh, additional discount for such customers 
will be 2%. 
 In case of COD article, if RTS is more than 25% for a particular month, postage of such 
articles shall be excluded from the postage while calculating the discount. 
 In case of non-COD article, if RTS is more than 8% for a particular month, postage of such 
articles shall be excluded from the postage while calculating the discount. 
CHAPTER XII 
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES OFFERED THROUGH COLLABORATION 
174. Post Office network for citizen centric services. 
(1) Post Office shall provide its network for offering citizen centric service offered by any Ministry 
or Department under the Central Government in accordance with the mutually agreed terms and 
conditions. 
(2)  The  concerned  authority  of  a  Post  Office  entering  into  a  partnership  or  agreement,  shall 
provide any product or service towards promotions or implementation of the policies of the State 
Government,  local  bodies,  public  or  private  entities,  in  accordance  with  the  mutually  agreed 
terms and conditions. 
(3) The charges, operating and accounting procedures for operationalisation of these partnerships 
or  agreement  as  per  sub-regulations  (1)  and  (2)  above,  shall  be  such  as  may  be  issued  by 
administrative instructions by the Director General from time to time. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 92 www.dakguru.com 
 
CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
A. PINCODE 
175. Postal Index Number. 
(1) PIN Code (Postal Index Number Code) is a six-digit postcode for the particular area mapped 
to the post office that receives the mail items for delivery under its jurisdiction. 
(2) PIN Code shall be specified by the Director General from time to time. 
(3) The writing of PIN code shall be mandatory on each item for transmission by post. 
B. REMOTELY MANAGED FRANKING MACHINE 
176. Franking machines. 
(1) Franking machines (Remotely Managed) of such vendors and models, which are authorised 
by the Director General, shall only be used for franking an appropriate postage value on the items. 
Explanation.- For   the   purposes  of   this   regulation,   "franking   machine"   means   a   machine 
authorised by the Director General, which provides an alternative mode for payment of postage 
in  respect  of  an  item  through  a  unique  frank  impression  and  can  be  managed  from  a  remote 
location  through  a server for  uploading credits or  postage  value  and  are  also  called  "remotely 
managed franking machines". 
(2) The Post Office shall not incur any liability for any damage or loss, caused to the licensee due 
to  the  purchase  of  an  unapproved  model  or  defective  machine  or  any  damage  done  to  the 
machine. 
(3) Any person, organisation, or authority may take the license for using the franking machine 
for franking a postage value on the items. 
(4)  The  Divisional  Head  or  independent  Gazetted  Postmaster  of  the  Post  Office  shall  be  the 
licensing authority for issuance of license for using franking machine (RMFM) on certain fees as 
may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
(5) The licensing authority shall be authorised to issue or renew or suspend or cancel a license 
issued for using a franking machine. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 93 www.dakguru.com 
 
(6) The licensing authority may reserve the right to refuse the issue or renewal of a license and 
cancel a license at any time after giving an opportunity being heard and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing. 
(7) The franked mail shall only be presented in the designated post office, identified at the time 
of issuance of license. 
(8) The mail which is franked on a particular day shall be presented in the designated post office 
on the same date or on the very next working day (if is not presented due to special circumstances) 
along with statement of mailing: 
Provided that the licencing authority may relax the period of presentation of franked mail in the 
post office under special circumstances and for the reasons to be recorded in writing. 
(9) The conditions, procedure of working, recharging and checking in respect of franking machine 
(RMFM), shall be as such may be specified by administrative instructions from time to time. 
177. Issuance of updated version of regulations annually. 
All the amendments made to these regulations may be compiled and an updated version of these 
regulations containing all the amendments made during a particular year, shall be published in 
the month of January of the following year. 
178. Postal operations order. 
(1)  All  the  executive or  administrative orders, to be  specified under  these  regulations, shall  be 
issued by the Department of Posts in  the Government of India through orders,  namely  "postal 
operations order" or "PO order". 
(2)  All  postal  operations  orders  issued  shall  also  be  compiled  on  half  yearly  basis  and  such 
compilation shall be issued in the month of July and January, for the orders issued during January 
to June and July to December, respectively. 
 
SCHEDULES 
TABLE VII of SCHEDULE I 
Price of Embossed Envelopes and Registration Envelopes 
The  embossed  envelope  and  the  registration  envelopes  specified below  shall  be  sold  at  the 
following prices, namely: 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 94 www.dakguru.com 
 
Item Price 
Embossed Envelopes 
 
For each (Domestic) envelope ₹ 5/- 
Registration Envelopes 
 
(i) For each small envelope ₹ 22/- + 50 paise stationery charges 
(ii) For each large envelope ₹ 22/- + ₹ 1/- stationery charge 
 
TABLE FOR RECOVERY OF DUES (GST Excluded) 
Amount to be recovered at the time of delivery 
S.No. Mail 
Product 
Weight 
(gms) 
Postage Product  to  be  treated 
in     Infringement     of 
initial Product 
Postage 
of later 
Product 
Amount     to 
be recovered 
1 Letter 20 5 Letter 5 Not applied 
2 Registered 
Letter 
20 22 Letter 22 Not applied 
3 Literature 
for Blind 
1000 0 Letter/Parcel/Book 
Post 
- Not applied 
4 Book     Post 
(Ordinary) 
600 37 Letter/Parcel 
(whichever the Postage 
is lower) 
Parcel = 
52 
Deficiency: 
(2 x 52) - 37 = 
67 
5 Book     Post 
(Regd) 
600 54 " Parcel = 
52 
Deficiency: 
(2 x 52) - 54 = 
50 
6 Gyan Post 300 37 India    Post    Parcel - 
Retail 
IP Parcel 
with 
Regn = 53 
Deficiency: 2 
(53-37) = 32 
7 Letter Card 5 3 Letter 5 Deficiency: 2 
(5-2.5) = 5 
8 Postcard 5 1 Letter 5 Deficiency: 2 
(5-0.50) = 9 
9 Periodical 
Post (Rs.10) 
100 2 Book Post 7 Deficiency: 7 
- 2 = 5 
 
179. Regulation 179: Insurance Services 
 Postal Life Insurance (PLI) & Rural Postal Life Insurance (RPLI). 
 This   regulation   empowers   the   Central Government   or   Director   General   to   issue 
Administrative Instructions governing the operation of insurance services. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 95 www.dakguru.com 
 
 It replaces the rigid structures of the old Post Office Insurance Fund Rules, allowing for 
more   flexible,   updated   guidelines   for   PLI/RPLI   products,   premiums,   and   claims 
management through executive orders. 
Regulation 180: Administrative Instructions for Financial Services 
 Financial Services (POSB, Savings Certificates, Money Remittance, etc.). 
 This   regulation   empowers   the   Central   Government   or Director   General   to   issue 
Administrative Instructions regarding financial services provided by the Post Office. 
 It covers the operational guidelines for Small Savings Schemes, Money Orders, and other 
banking services, enabling the Department to update interest rates, service charges, and 
procedural  rules  (like  KYC  or  limits)  swiftly  via  administrative  orders  rather  than 
amending the act itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 96 www.dakguru.com 
 
CHEAT SHEET: POST OFFICE REGULATIONS, 2024 
Parent  Act: Post  Office  Act,  2023  | Notified: Dec  16,  2024  | Structure: 15  Chapters,  180 
Regulations, 5 Schedules. 
I. OVERVIEW OF CHAPTERS 
Chapter Regulations Topic Covered Key Takeaways / Mnemonic 
Ch 1 1 – 2 
Preliminary 
Short  Title  & Definitions (Accountable  items, 
Payee, etc.). 
Ch 2 3 – 40 
General Rules 
Business Hours (Reg 3), Powe to fix hours (Reg 
4),  Payment  of  Postage,  Stamps,  Prohibitions, 
Packing. 
Ch 3 41 – 72 
Delivery of Items Delivery of Accountable/Non-accountable 
items, Refusal, Undelivered Mail, Redirection. 
Ch 4 73 – 86 
Compensation Liability of Dept, Claims process for 
Loss/Damage/Delay. 
Ch 5 87 – 106 
Domestic Items Limits on weight/size, specific rules for Letters, 
Parcels, Book Packets within India. 
Ch 6 107 – 127 
International 
Items 
Foreign    Post    rules,    Customs    declarations, 
Prohibited items abroad. 
Ch 7 128 Universal    Postal 
Service 
Defines core services (Letters/Postcards/Parcels) 
available to all citizens at affordable rates. 
Ch 8 129 – 131 
Official 
Correspondence 
Service  Stamps,  Camp  Bag,  Special  Bags  for 
high officials. 
Ch 9 132 – 144 
Value Added 
Services 
Registration, Insurance, COD, Proof of Delivery 
(POD). 
Ch 10 145 – 169 
Money Remittance Money    Orders    (eMO),    IPOs,    International 
remittances. 
Ch 11 170 – 173 
Business Solutions Bulk   Mail,   BNPL   (Book   Now   Pay   Later), 
Franking Machines. 
Ch 12 174 
Collaborations Partnerships  with  other  entities  (Govt/Private) 
for service delivery. 
Ch 13 175 – 178 
Miscellaneous PIN Codes, Identity Cards, Philately rules. 
Ch 14 179 Insurance 
Services 
PLI  &  RPLI (Enabling  provision  for  Admin 
Instructions). 
Ch 15 180 Financial Services POSB & Savings Certs (Enabling provision for 
Admin Instructions). 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 97 www.dakguru.com 
 
II. KEY REGULATIONS TO REMEMBER 
 Reg 3 (Business Hours): Defines standard 6 hours for counters; Max 5 hours for BOs. 
 Reg 4: Empowered Circle/Regional Heads to extend/modify business hours. 
 Reg 9: Dealing with Fraudulent/Used Stamps (Defaced/Cut stamps rejected). 
 Reg 20: Exemption on address details for VVIP/High Officials (Camp Bag). 
 Reg 128: Universal Postal Service (The "Public Service" Obligation). 
 Reg 179: Replaces old PLI Rules; empowers DG to issue orders for PLI/RPLI. 
 Reg 180: Replaces old POSB Rules; empowers DG to issue orders for Savings Bank. 
 
 
III. THE 5 SCHEDULES (FEES & RATES) 
 Schedule I: Postage & Fees for Domestic Items (Letters, Parcels). 
 Schedule II: Postage & Fees for Other Items (Media Post, Direct Post). 
 Schedule III: Postage & Fees for International Items. 
 Schedule IV: Charges for Value Added Services (Registration fee, Insurance fee). 
 Schedule V: Charges for Money Remittance (MO commission). 
 
IV. QUICK COMPARISON (Old vs. New) 
 Old: Indian Post Office Act, 1898 & IPO Rules, 1933 (Rigid). 
 New: PO Act, 2023 & PO Regulations, 2024 (Flexible). 
 Shift: Rules for PLI and Savings Bank are no longer hard-coded in the Act; they are now 
managed   via Administrative   Instructions (Reg   179/180)   to   allow   faster   interest 
rate/product changes. 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 98 www.dakguru.com 
 
PREMIUM SPEED POST PRODUCTS (2026 LAUNCH) 
Issued By: Mail Operations Division, Dated 19.12.2025.  
Launch Date: January 2026. Category: Premium variants under Speed Post 
 
Study Notes: Premium Speed Post Products (2026 Launch) 
Authority: Mail Operations Division, Dated 19.12.2025. 
Launch Date: January 2026. 
Category: Premium variants under Speed Post. 
1. Product Overview & Scope 
These products are introduced to capture the BFSI (Banking, Financial Services and Insurance) 
market and compete with private couriers by offering Day Definite Delivery. 
Feature 24 SPEED POST 48 SPEED POST 
Service 
Definition 
Guaranteed delivery on Next Day (D+1). Guaranteed  delivery  in Next 
2 Days (D+2). 
Availability 6    Metro    Cities    only: Delhi,    Mumbai, 
Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad. 
6  Metro  Cities  only: Same 
list. 
Bag Color 
Code 
RED. ORANGE. 
Primary USP 
Money   Back   Guarantee   (Full   Refund   if 
delayed). 
Money  Back  Guarantee  (Full 
Refund if delayed). 
Bundled 
Service 
OTP Delivery (Free/No extra charge). OTP Delivery (Free/No extra 
charge). 
 
 
 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 99 www.dakguru.com 
 
2. Tariff Structure (Exclusive of GST) 
These rates are significantly higher than standard Speed Post due to the guarantee. 
A. 24 SPEED POST (D+1) Rates 
Weight 
Slab 
Local Up   to   200 
km 
201 - 500 
km 
501 - 1000 
km 
1001 - 2000 
km 
Above 2000 
km 
Up to 50g 
₹ 38 ₹ 94 ₹ 94 ₹ 94 ₹ 94 ₹ 94 
51g to 250g 
₹ 48 ₹ 118 ₹ 126 ₹ 136 ₹ 144 ₹ 154 
251g to 
500g 
₹ 56 ₹ 140 ₹ 150 ₹ 164 ₹ 172 ₹ 186 
 
B. 48 SPEED POST (D+2) Rates  
Weight 
Slab 
Local Up   to   200 
km 
201 - 500 
km 
501 - 1000 
km 
1001 - 2000 
km 
Above 2000 
km 
Up to 50g 
₹ 25 ₹ 61 ₹ 61 ₹ 61 ₹ 61 ₹ 61 
51g to 250g 
₹ 31 ₹ 77 ₹ 82 ₹ 88 ₹ 94 ₹ 100 
251g to 
500g 
₹ 36 ₹ 91 ₹ 98 ₹ 107 ₹ 112 ₹ 121 
 
 
3. Operational Procedures (SOP Highlights) 
A. Booking 
 Cut-off Time: 4 PM for retail counters; 6 PM for Bulk/BPC with direct bagging. 
 Mandatory Fields: Mobile Number of Sender & Addressee (crucial for SMS alerts & OTP). 
 Labeling: 
o 24 Speed Post: Must use Red Priority Sticker. 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 100 www.dakguru.com 
 
o 48 Speed Post: Must use Priority Sticker (Orange implied by bag color). 
B. Processing & Transmission 
 Bagging: 
o 24 Speed Post: Red Color Bag. Must reach Origin APTMO/NSH by 8 PM. 
o 48 Speed Post: Orange Color Bag. Must reach Origin NSH by 8 PM. 
 Air Transmission: 
o 24 Speed Post: Connected to flights the same night. 
o 48 Speed Post: Connected to flights by 9 AM next morning. 
C. Delivery 
 Priority: Topmost priority. Separate delivery manifest issued. 
 Method: Delivery staff must call the addressee to confirm availability. 
 Update: Real-time update on Internal Mobile App (IMA) at the doorstep. 
 OTP: Delivery is OTP-based (Complementary service). 
4. Compensation Policy (Money Back Guarantee) 
This is the most critical regulatory change for these products. 
 Eligibility: 
1. Delay: Full refund of Speed Post charges. 
2. Loss/Damage/Pilferage: Double the Speed Post charges OR ₹1000 (whichever is 
less). 
 Timeline: Claim must be filed within 7 calendar days from committed delivery date. 
 Resolution Time: Claims resolved within 7 working days. 
 Payment: Directly to customer's bank account. 
 Exclusions: Force  majeure, incorrect  address,  prohibited  items, or  booking  after cut-off 
time. 
 

Dak Guru Study Material                                              PO REGULATIONS, 2024 
936 30 30 396 | Page 101 www.dakguru.com 
 
5. Staff Incentives (Exam Important) 
To ensure priority handling, staff are incentivized per article. 
Role Incentive for "24 Speed Post" Incentive for "48 Speed Post" 
Booking PA (Retail) ₹ 3.00 per article  ₹ 2.00 per article  
Booking Supervisor 
₹ 0.30 per article  ₹ 0.20 per article  
Delivery Staff ₹ 2.00 per article  ₹ 2.00 per article  
Sorting PA (Hub) 
₹ 0.25 per article  ₹ 0.25 per article  
 
6. Key Differences for "Match the Following" Questions 
Parameter 24 SPEED POST 48 SPEED POST 
Timeline 
D+1 (Next Day) D+2 (Next 2 Days) 
Bag Color RED ORANGE 
Flight Connection 
Same Night (Priority) Next Morning (By 9 AM) 
Booking Incentive 
₹ 3.00 ₹ 2.00 
Target Audience 
Urgent Documents Time-sensitive but less urgent 
 

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART I: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 1 - 40)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
1.  The control and administration of the Department of Posts is vested in the:
(a)  Postal Services Board
(b)  Director General of Posts
(c)  Minister of Communications
(d)  Secretary, Department of Posts
2.  Post Offices in India are divided into how many classes for the purpose of admin-
istration?
(a)  Two (HO and SO)
(b)  Three (HO, SO, and BO)
(c)  Four (GPO, HO, SO, BO)
(d)  Five (GPO, HO, MDG, SO, BO)
3.  Which authority is competent to extend the working hours of a Night Post Office
up to 8:30 P.M.?
(a)  Head of the Circle
(b)  Director General Posts
(c)  Divisional Superintendent
(d)  Regional PMG
4.  Night Post Offices generally remain closed on:
(a)  Sundays
(b)  Gazetted Holidays
(c)  National Holidays only
(d)  Never (They work on all days)
5.  Mobile Post Offices are intended to provide which of the following facilities?
(a)  Booking of Money Orders
(b)  Booking of Savings Bank transac-
tions
(c)  Sale of stamps and booking of sur-
face mail
(d)  Delivery of accountable articles
6.  Mobile Post Offices remain closed on:
(a)  Sundays and Postal Holidays
(b)  Sundays only
(c)  National Holidays only
(d)  They function on all days with re-
stricted hours
7.  According to Clause 5, the business hours for the issue of Money Orders and sale
of IPOs in Post Offices are generally:
1www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  9:00 to 14:00 hours
(b)  9:00 to 15:00 hours
(c)  9:00 to 16:00 hours
(d)  For 5 hours a day
8.  Booking of Registered and Insured articles stops generally at what time on week-
days?
(a)  14:00 hours
(b)  15:00 hours
(c)  16:00 hours
(d)  30  minutes  before  the  closing  of
the office
9.  Which of the following is NOT a Postal Holiday?
(a)  Republic Day
(b)  Good Friday
(c)  Raksha Bandhan
(d)  Id-ul-Zuha
10.  Revenue stamps can be used for payment of postage:
(a)  On all articles
(b)  On Registered Letters only
(c)  Never  (They  cannot  be  used  for
postage)
(d)  Only  if  Postage  stamps  are  un-
available
11.  A license for the use of a Franking Machine is issued by:
(a)  The Postmaster of the concerned
HO
(b)  The  Superintendent  of  Post  Of-
fices
(c)  The Director of Postal Services
(d)  The Head of the Circle
12.  Under the Remotely Managed Franking System (RMFS), the impression should be
in which color?
(a)  Bright Red
(b)  Blue
(c)  Green
(d)  Black
13.  The commission (rebate) allowed on the usage of Franking Machines for a booking
value exceeding Rs.  5000 is:
(a)  1.5%
(b)  2.0%
(c)  2.5%
(d)  3.0%
14.  A Franking Machine licensee must reset the machine when the credit falls below:
(a)  Rs.  100
(b)  Rs.  500
(c)  Rs.  1000
(d)  Rs.  2000
15.  Postage stamps should be affixed on which side of the address side of the article?
2www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Top Left-hand corner
(b)  Top Right-hand corner
(c)  Bottom Right-hand corner
(d)  Center
16.  The  use  of  fictitious  stamps  is  an  offence  punishable  under  which  section  of  the
Indian Penal Code?
(a)  Section 263-A
(b)  Section 420
(c)  Section 192
(d)  Section 300
17.  Articles posted with ’Fictitious Stamps’ generally be:
(a)  Returned to sender immediately
(b)  Sent to the Returned Letter Office
(RLO)
(c)  Delivered to addressee with dou-
ble postage
(d)  Destroyed at the office of posting
18.  Every letter, packet, or parcel must have the date-stamp of at least how many Post
Offices?
(a)  One (Office of Posting)
(b)  Two (Office of Posting and Deliv-
ery)
(c)  Three  (Posting,   Transit,   Deliv-
ery)
(d)  None if it is Ordinary Mail
19.  When using wax cloth for packing, which of the following is mandatory?
(a)  It should be used as the outer cov-
ering
(b)  It should be used as an inner cov-
ering
(c)  Postage stamps should be affixed
directly on it
(d)  No specific rule applies
20.  Sealing of an uninsured registered letter is:
(a)  Mandatory
(b)  Not Mandatory unless it contains
valuables
(c)  Prohibited
(d)  Discretionary for the sender
21.  Coins, bullion, precious stones, and jewellery must be sent by:
(a)  Registered Post
(b)  Speed Post only
(c)  Insured Post
(d)  Ordinary Post
22.  What is the minimum size of a postal article (roll form)?
(a)  10× 7 cm
(b)  Length + twice diameter = 17 cm
(c)  Length 10 cm
(d)  No minimum size
23.  Articles found in letterboxes with ”To Pay” stamps or denoted as ”Registered” but
not booked at the counter will be:
3www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Treated as registered articles
(b)  Returned to the sender
(c)  Booked  as  registered  and  receipt
issued
(d)  Disposed  of  at  the  discretion  of
the PM
24.  Late fee letters are accepted:
(a)  During business hours
(b)  After  the  closing  of  mails  but
within the interval allowed
(c)  At any time during the night
(d)  Only on Sundays
25.  The ”Certificate of Posting” service was:
(a)  Enhanced in 2020
(b)  Discontinued in 2011
(c)  Merged with Speed Post
(d)  Available only for foreign mail
26.  A sender can recall an article posted by him/her under which condition?
(a)  If it has not been delivered to the
addressee
(b)  If  it  has  not  been  confiscated  or
destroyed by competent authority
(c)  Both (a) and (b)
(d)  It is not possible to recall an arti-
cle
27.  The fee for the recall of a domestic postal article is:
(a)  Rs.  6/- per article
(b)  Rs.  10/- per article
(c)  Rs.  3/- per article
(d)  Free of cost
28.  An article addressed to a deceased person can be delivered to:
(a)  Any relative claiming it
(b)  The neighbor
(c)  Only  the  legal  heir  or  executor
with proper proof
(d)  Returned  to  sender  immediately
without inquiry
29.  Registered articles addressed to a minor (not having a guardian) can be delivered
to:
(a)  The minor himself
(b)  The neighbor
(c)  Retained until majority
(d)  Returned to sender
30.  Delivery of a registered article to a Pardanashin woman requires:
(a)  Her  signature  attested  by  a  re-
spectable  witness  known  to  the
postman
(b)  Her thumb impression only
(c)  Delivery to her husband
(d)  Delivery to her servant
31.  If  an  addressee  refuses  to  sign  the  acknowledgement  of  a  Registered  Article  but
signs the delivery slip:
4www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  The  article  should  not  be  deliv-
ered
(b)  The article may be delivered, and
a  remark  made  on  the  acknowl-
edgement
(c)  The article is returned as refused
(d)  The Postmaster decides
32.  A damaged Registered article must be delivered:
(a)  By the Postman in the usual beat
(b)  At the Post Office counter gener-
ally
(c)  By the Inspector of Posts
(d)  By the Overseer
33.  ”Poste Restante” articles are kept in the Post Office for a period of:
(a)  7 days
(b)  1 month (generally)
(c)  3 months
(d)  15 days
34.  An instruction for a change of address is valid for:
(a)  One year
(b)  Two years
(c)  Three years
(d)  Indefinitely
35.  Which of the following is strictly prohibited for transmission by post?
(a)  Sharp  instruments  properly  pro-
tected
(b)  Explosive,   dangerous,   or   filthy
substances
(c)  Living bees
(d)  Silkworms
36.  Turpentine and varnish can be transmitted by post if:
(a)  Packed  in  a  double  container  as
per rules
(b)  Sent by air mail
(c)  Sent as ordinary post
(d)  It is prohibited completely
37.  The weight limit for an Unregistered Parcel is:
(a)  2 kg
(b)  4 kg
(c)  10 kg
(d)  20 kg
38.  What is the fee for redirection of a parcel within India?
(a)  Free of charge
(b)  Half the prepaid rate
(c)  Full prepaid rate
(d)  Rs.  10 flat
39.  Who is considered the ”Payee” of a Money Order?
5www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  The person who sends the money
(b)  The person named in the MO to
whom money is to be paid
(c)  ThePostmasterpayingthe
money
(d)  ThePostmandeliveringthe
money
40.  Identity Cards are issued by the Post Office to:
(a)  Tourists only
(b)  Establish   the   identity   of   the
holder for postal transactions
(c)  Government employees only
(d)  Use as a Voting ID
41.  The validity of an Identity Card issued by the Post Office is:
(a)  1 year
(b)  3 years
(c)  5 years
(d)  Lifetime
42.  ”Window Delivery” is made for:
(a)  All articles
(b)  Articles  on  which  no  postage  is
due
(c)  Articles  addressed  to  Post  Box
holders
(d)  Articles  where  the  addressee  has
no fixed address or opts for it
43.  Post Boxes are rented out for a period of:
(a)  Monthly only
(b)  Financial Year (April to March)
(c)  Calendar Year (Jan to Dec)
(d)  Any period chosen by the renter
44.  If a renter of a Post Box does not clear it for a week, what action is taken?
(a)  A notice is sent to him by regis-
tered post
(b)  The box is locked by the Postmas-
ter
(c)  The  correspondence  is  delivered
through Postman
(d)  The box is cancelled
45.  The official postal article must bear the superscription:
(a)  ”On  India  Government  Service”
(O.I.G.S)
(b)  ”Government of India”
(c)  ”Service Post”
(d)  ”Official Mail”
46.  Camp Bags are used for:
(a)  High  officers  of  the  Government
on tour
(b)  Military personnel
(c)  Foreign tourists
(d)  Sorting offices
6www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
47.  Which clause deals with the treatment of articles wrongly addressed to another post
town?
(a)  Clause 30
(b)  Clause 35
(c)  Clause 40
(d)  Clause 45
48.  Stamps should be obliterated with:
(a)  Date stamp
(b)  Pen
(c)  Pencil
(d)  They should not be obliterated
49.  A ”Blind Literature” packet is exempt from:
(a)  Postage and Registration fee
(b)  Air mail charges
(c)  Insurance fee
(d)  Acknowledgement fee
50.  The rent for a Post Box and Post Bag combined for one financial year is currently:
(a)  Rs.  150
(b)  Rs.  250
(c)  Rs.  100
(d)  Rs.  300
7www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
1BControl is vested in the Director General of Posts (Clause 1).
2BThree  classes:  Head,  Sub,  and  Branch  Post  Offices  (Clause
2).
3BDirector General can extend hours up to 8:30 PM (Clause 3).
4CNight POs work on Sundays and Gazetted holidays but have
restricted hours on National Holidays.  However, technically
they are ’open’.  Usually, Q asks when they are closed?  They
aren’t closed.  But work is restricted.  If forced choice, ’Never’
is  closest  or  specific  National  holidays  depending  on  latest
circulars, but generally they work.  (Clause 3).
5CMobile  POs  sell  stamps/stationery  and  book  surface  mail
(Clause 4).
6AMobile  POs  are  closed  on  Sundays  and  Postal  Holidays
(Clause 4).
7BGenerally 5 hours (10 to 3) or 9 to 15:00 hours depending on
the category (Clause 5).
8DBooking usually stops 30 mins before office closing (Clause 5).
9CRaksha   Bandhan   is   NOT   a   compulsory   Postal   Holiday
(Clause 8).
10CRevenue  stamps  cannot  be  used  for  payment  of  postage
(Clause 9).
11BLicense  is  issued  by  the  Divisional  Superintendent  (Clause
11).
12BRMFS impressions are generally Blue (Clause 11).
13D3%  rebate  is  allowed  for  franking  readings  above  Rs.   5000
(Clause 11).
14AMachine must be reset when credit falls to Rs.  100 (Clause
11).
15BTop Right-hand corner (Clause 12).
16ASection 263-A of IPC (Clause 14).
17BSent to RLO for disposal (Clause 14).
8www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
18BAt least two:  Office of Posting and Office of Delivery (Clause
18).
19BWax cloth must be used as an inner covering to hold stamps
(Clause 15).
20BNot mandatory for uninsured registered letters, but advised
(Clause 16).
21CMust be insured (Clause 25/Clause 36).
22BLength + 2x Diameter = 17 cm (Clause 15).
23BReturned to sender; cannot be treated as registered if found
in letterbox (Clause 26).
24BAccepted during the interval marked for late fee (Clause 4).
25BDiscontinued vide DG Posts instruction in 2011.
26CCan be recalled if not delivered/confiscated/destroyed (Clause
33).
27AThe fee is Rs.  6/- per article (Clause 33).
28COnly to legal heir/executor; no counter-claimant should exist
(Clause 39).
29ACan be delivered to the minor himself (Clause 37).
30ASignature attested by a respectable witness known to Postman
(Clause 37).
31BDelivered;  remark  made  on  acknowledgement  regarding  re-
fusal to sign it (Clause 37).
32BDelivered at the PO counter (Clause 40).
33B1 month generally; 3 months for tourists if requested (Clause
62).
34CValid for 3 years (Clause 65).
35BExplosives are strictly prohibited (Clause 118/209).
36AAllowed if packed in double containers (Clause 124).
37B4 kg is the general limit for unregistered parcels (Clause 156).
38BHalf the prepaid rate for redirection (Clause 67/163).
39BPayee is the person to whom money is paid (Definition).
40BTo establish identity for postal transactions (Clause 63).
41B3 years (Clause 63).
9www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 1-40)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
42DFor  addressees  with  no  fixed  address  or  those  opting  for  it
(Clause 52).
43BFinancial Year (April 1 to March 31) (Clause 55).
44CCorrespondence delivered through Postman (Clause 56).
45AO.I.G.S (Clause 198).
46AHigh officers on tour (Clause 206).
47AClause 30 deals with articles addressed to other towns.
48AStamps must be obliterated with the date stamp (Clause 13).
49AExempt from postage and registration (Clause 134).
50BRs.  250 (subject to revision, standard book rate for exams).
10www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 41-72)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART II: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 41 - 72)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
51.  Which of the following articles can be sent as Value Payable (VP) articles?
(a)  Only Parcels
(b)  Only Letters
(c)  Registered Parcels, Letters, Book
Packets, and Newspapers
(d)  Unregistered Parcels
52.  The amount to be recovered from the addressee on a Value Payable article should
not exceed:
(a)  Rs.  1,000
(b)  Rs.  2,000
(c)  Rs.  5,000
(d)  Rs.  10,000
53.  The sender of a Value Payable article must sign a declaration stating that:
(a)  The article contains no prohibited
items
(b)  The  value  declared  is  the  actual
market value
(c)  The execution of the order is bona
fide
(d)  The article is insured
54.  If the addressee of a Value Payable article is not found, the article is retained in
the Post Office for:
(a)  3 days
(b)  7 days
(c)  14 days
(d)  1 month
55.  Insurance is mandatory for which of the following?
(a)  All Parcels above 2 kg
(b)  Coin,  bullion, platinum, precious
stones, jewellery or currency notes
(c)  Any article containing documents
(d)  Books   sent   to   government   li-
braries
56.  The maximum limit for insurance of a postal article at a Branch Post Office (BO)
is:
(a)  Rs.  500
(b)  Rs.  600
(c)  Rs.  10,000
(d)  Rs.  1,00,000
6www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 41-72)Dak Guru Exclusive
57.  Articles on which customs duty is payable are generally delivered:
(a)  By the Postman at the doorstep
(b)  Through Window Delivery at the
Post Office
(c)  By the Customs Officer
(d)  Directly to the bank
58.  When  taking  delivery  of  an  insured  article,  if  the  addressee  is  not  known  to  the
post office staff:
(a)  Delivery is refused
(b)  Some  proof  of  identity  or  a  wit-
ness known to the postman is re-
quired
(c)  The  article  is  returned  to  sender
immediately
(d)  The  article  is  sent  to  the  Police
Station
59.  Who can rent a Post Box?
(a)  Only Government offices
(b)  Only Business firms
(c)  Any person who desires to receive
mail through it
(d)  Only residents within 1 km of the
PO
60.  If a Post Box renter loses the key, they must:
(a)  Make a duplicate key themselves
(b)  Inform the Post Office and pay for
a new lock and key
(c)  Break the lock open
(d)  Surrender the Post Box
61.  The system of Post Bags is available at:
(a)  All Post Offices
(b)  Only Head Post Offices
(c)  All delivery Post Offices
(d)  Only where the Post Box system
is available
62.  For a Post Bag, the lock and key must be supplied by:
(a)  The Post Office
(b)  The Renter
(c)  The Postal Division
(d)  It is not locked
63.  A ”Delivery Ticket” is necessary for taking delivery of:
(a)  Ordinary letters
(b)  Registered articles addressed to a
Post Box number
(c)  Money Orders
(d)  Speed Post articles
64.  Articles superscribed ”To be kept till called for” are treated as:
7www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 41-72)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Refused
(b)  Poste Restante
(c)  Unclaimed
(d)  Redirected
65.  The fee for issuing a Postal Identity Card is:
(a)  Rs.  9
(b)  Rs.  20
(c)  Rs.  50
(d)  Rs.  100
66.  If a Postal Identity Card is lost, a duplicate card:
(a)  Can be issued on payment of fee
(b)  Can be issued free of cost
(c)  Cannot be issued
(d)  Is issued only after police verifica-
tion
67.  Redirection of a postal article is free of charge if:
(a)  It is an unregistered article
(b)  It is a parcel
(c)  It has not been opened and is pre-
sented at the office of delivery
(d)  It is redirected to a foreign coun-
try
68.  Instructions regarding change of residence are registered at the Post Office:
(a)  Free of cost
(b)  On payment of a prescribed fee
(c)  Only for VIPs
(d)  Only for Government servants
69.  If an article is redirected by an agent of the addressee to a new address, it is treated
as:
(a)  Posted for the first time
(b)  Redirected mail
(c)  Returned mail
(d)  Refused mail
70.  An instruction given to the Post Office for the redirection of articles is valid for:
(a)  3 months
(b)  6 months
(c)  1 year
(d)  3 years
71.  Compensation for the loss of a Registered Article is currently:
(a)  Rs.  25
(b)  Rs.  100
(c)  Double the registration fee
(d)  Actual value of contents
72.  Currency notes can be sent by Insured Post up to a value of:
8www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 41-72)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Rs.  10,000
(b)  Rs.  20,000
(c)  Rs.  50,000
(d)  Rs.  1,00,000
73.  The renter of a Post Bag can clear the bag:
(a)  Any time during business hours
(b)  Only once a day
(c)  Only in the morning
(d)  24 hours a day
74.  Registered articles are delivered to the addressee:
(a)  Without signature
(b)  On signing the receipt
(c)  By dropping in the letterbox
(d)  Only at the Post Office counter
75.  Which clause deals with articles addressed to deceased persons?
(a)  Clause 39
(b)  Clause 66
(c)  Clause 72
(d)  Clause 80
76.  Is it possible to rent a Post Box and Post Bag together?
(a)  Yes, with a combined fee
(b)  No,  they  must  be  rented  sepa-
rately
(c)  Only for Government institutions
(d)  Only in GPOs
77.  Interception of postal articles can be ordered by:
(a)  The Postmaster
(b)  The District Magistrate or Com-
missioner of Police
(c)  The Sender
(d)  The Neighbor
78.  Once an article is posted, it becomes the property of:
(a)  The Sender
(b)  The Post Office (during transit) /
Addressee
(c)  The Government of India
(d)  Nobody
79.  Complaints regarding Value Payable Articles must be made within:
(a)  3 months
(b)  6 months
(c)  1 year
(d)  2 years
80.  ”Express Delivery” (special delivery) of unregistered letters/postcards is:
(a)  Available in all POs
(b)  Discontinued
(c)  Available only in Metro cities
(d)  Replaced by Speed Post
9www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 41-72)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE (PART II)
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Regulations)
51CVP articles can include registered parcels, letters, book pack-
ets, newspapers (Clause 42).
52CMaximum amount is Rs.  5,000 (Clause 43).
53CSender must declare the execution is bona fide (Clause 44).
54BRetained for 7 days (Clause 45).
55BMandatory for coin, bullion, jewellery, currency (Clause 48).
56BLimit at BO is Rs.  600 (Clause 49).
57BCustoms  duty  articles  are  usually  delivered  at  the  window
(Clause 52).
58BProof of identity or witness required (Clause 53).
59CAny person/firm can rent if available (Clause 55).
60BMust inform PO and pay for new lock/key; cannot use private
key (Clause 55).
61CAvailable at all delivery Post Offices (Clause 56).
62BRenter supplies lock and key (Clause 57).
63BRequired for Registered articles for Box holders (Clause 58).
64BTreated as ”Poste Restante” (Clause 62).
65AFee is Rs.  9 (Clause 63).
66CDuplicate  cannot  be  issued;  fresh  card  must  be  applied  for
(Clause 63).
67CFree  if  unopened  and  presented  at  delivery  office  (Clause
64/67).
68AChange  of  address  instructions  are  registered  free  of  charge
(Clause 65).
69ATreated as posted for the first time (re-posting) (Clause 67).
70AValid for 3 months (Clause 69).
71CDouble  the  registration  fee  (currently  indexed  as  such  in
exam contexts, though specific monetary limits exist in rules)
(Clause 47).  *Note:  Standard exam answer.*
10www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 41-72)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Regulations)
72BCurrency notes limit is Rs.  20,000 (Clause 48).
73ADuring business hours (Clause 57).
74BDelivered on signing the receipt (Clause 51).
75AClause  39  (though  referenced  in  Q28,  it  applies  here  too.
Clause 66 refers to redirection by PO).
76AYes, combined rent is possible (Clause 56).
77BDM  or  Police  Commissioner  can  order  interception  (Clause
70).
78CTechnically property of GOI/Post Office in trust until delivery
(Clause 72 context).
79BWithin 6 months (Clause 46).
80BExpress Delivery is Discontinued (Clause 60).
11www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART III: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 73 - 86)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
81.  According to Clause 73, instructions regarding a change of residence or redirection
of valid articles are valid for a period of:
(a)  One month
(b)  Three months
(c)  Six months
(d)  One year
82.  If a change of address instruction is not renewed after the prescribed period, the
instruction will be:
(a)  Automatically  extended  for  an-
other month
(b)  Treated as lapsed
(c)  Converted to a permanent record
(d)  Charged a late fee
83.  Ordinarily, an undelivered inland postal article (other than VP) is kept in the Post
Office for a period of:
(a)  3 days
(b)  7 days
(c)  14 days
(d)  30 days
84.  If an article is definitively refused by the addressee, it should be:
(a)  Kept for 7 days
(b)  Kept  for  3  days  to  see  if  they
change their mind
(c)  Returned to sender immediately
(d)  Sent to the RLO immediately
85.  While inland articles are detained for 7 days, the detention period for foreign articles
(addressed to Poste Restante) is generally:
(a)  7 days
(b)  15 days
(c)  1 month
(d)  3 months
86.  What does the abbreviation ”RLO” stand for in the context of Clause 75?
(a)  Regional Letter Office
(b)  Registered Letter Office
(c)  Returned Letter Office
(d)  Remote Letter Operations
87.  Articles sent to the Returned Letter Office are opened by:
10www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Any Postal Assistant
(b)  The Postmaster of the local HO
(c)  Officers of the RLO appointed for
the purpose
(d)  They are never opened
88.  If the sender of an undelivered article cannot be found even after opening the article
at the RLO, the article is:
(a)  Kept forever
(b)  Sold in auction immediately
(c)  Destroyed  after  a  prescribed  re-
tention period
(d)  Donated to charity
89.  Who is primarily responsible for the payment of postage and other postal charges
on an article?
(a)  The Addressee
(b)  The Sender
(c)  The Post Office
(d)  The Government
90.  If the addressee refuses to pay the postal charges due on an article, the charges:
(a)  Are waived
(b)  Are recovered from the Postman
(c)  Are recovered from the Sender
(d)  Become a bad debt
91.  Postal charges due from a person who refuses to pay can be recovered as if they
were:
(a)  A fine imposed by a magistrate
(b)  Arrears of land revenue
(c)  Income Tax dues
(d)  A civil debt
92.  Can the Post Office withhold other articles addressed to a person who refuses to
pay postal charges?
(a)  Yes, until the charges are paid
(b)  No, each article is a separate con-
tract
(c)  Yes, but only for registered mail
(d)  Only with a court order
93.  The ”Exclusive Privilege” of the Post Office in conveying letters is defined under
which Section of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898?
(a)  Section 4
(b)  Section 6
(c)  Section 10
(d)  Section 23
94.  Which of the following is an EXCEPTION to the exclusive privilege of the Post
Office?
11www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Letters sent by a courier service
(b)  Letters sent by a private friend to
be  delivered  on  his  way,  without
hire or reward
(c)  Letters containing cheques
(d)  Business letters sent by bulk mail-
ers
95.  Letters  solely  concerning  the  affairs  of  the  sender  or  receiver,  sent  by  a  special
messenger on purpose, are:
(a)  Illegal
(b)  Permitted only if stamped
(c)  Permitted without hire or reward
(d)  Prohibited under Clause 83
96.  The  Government  or  the  Post  Office  is  generally  exempted  from  liability  for  loss,
misdelivery, delay, or damage to any postal article under:
(a)  Section 4 of the IPO Act
(b)  Section 6 of the IPO Act
(c)  Clause 84 of the PO Guide only
(d)  The Consumer Protection Act
97.  A postal officer can be held personally liable for the loss of an article ONLY if:
(a)  The article was registered
(b)  The loss was caused fraudulently
or by his willful act or default
(c)  The  sender  complains  within  30
days
(d)  The value exceeds Rs.  1000
98.  Postal officials are prohibited from giving information regarding postal articles to:
(a)  The sender
(b)  The addressee
(c)  Any person other than the sender
or addressee (unless authorized)
(d)  The Police (even with a warrant)
99.  Licenses for the sale of postage stamps are issued by the:
(a)  Postmaster General
(b)  Superintendent of Post Offices
(c)  Head Postmaster
(d)  Inspector of Posts
100.  Licensed  Stamp  Vendors  are  allowed  a  commission  on  the  sale  of  stamps.   This
practice is regulated under:
(a)  Clause 86
(b)  Clause 90
(c)  Clause 10
(d)  Clause 5
101.  A Licensed Stamp Vendor must sell stamps:
(a)  At any place he chooses
(b)  Only at the place specified in his
license
(c)  By moving door-to-door
(d)  Inside  the  Post  Office  premises
only
12www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
102.  Are ”Common Carriers” (like bus conductors or couriers) allowed to carry letters
for hire?
(a)  Yes,  if  they  charge  less  than  the
Post Office
(b)  Yes, if authorized by the District
Magistrate
(c)  No,  it  is  an  infringement  of  the
Post Office monopoly
(d)  Yes, for urgent documents only
103.  Which articles are NOT kept for the standard 7-day detention period but returned
immediately if the addressee is not found?
(a)  Articles  with  specific  ”Return  if
not delivered” instructions
(b)  Registered Newspapers
(c)  Unregistered Parcels
(d)  Book Packets
104.  Breach of secrecy by a postal official is punishable under:
(a)  The Indian Penal Code
(b)  The Indian Post Office Act (Sec-
tion 56 implied)
(c)  The Official Secrets Act
(d)  Civil Service Conduct Rules only
105.  Instructions for change of address must be given:
(a)  Verbally to the Postman
(b)  In writing to the Post office
(c)  By phone to the Postmaster
(d)  By sticking a note on the door
106.  If a sender refuses to pay the recovered charges for an article refused by the ad-
dressee, the Post Office can:
(a)  Prosecute him in a court of law
(b)  Detain any other article addressed
to him until charges are paid
(c)  Confiscate his savings account
(d)  Blacklist  him  from  using  postal
services
107.  Does the Post Office guarantee the time of delivery of an article?
(a)  Yes, for Speed Post
(b)  Yes, for Registered Post
(c)  No, no guarantee is given (Clause
84)
(d)  Yes, if late fee is paid
108.  Can a Licensed Stamp Vendor exchange postage stamps for cash?
(a)  Yes, always
(b)  No, strictly prohibited
(c)  Yes, with a 5% deduction
(d)  Only if stamps are damaged
109.  Which clause of the PO Guide Part I deals with ”Legal Responsibility of the Post
Office”?
13www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Clause 83
(b)  Clause 84
(c)  Clause 85
(d)  Clause 86
110.  Which clause deals with the ”Period of detention of undeliverable articles”?
(a)  Clause 72
(b)  Clause 73
(c)  Clause 74
(d)  Clause 75
14www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE (PART III)
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
81BInstructions are valid for 3 months (Clause 73).
82BIt will be treated as lapsed if not renewed (Clause 73).
83BNormally kept for 7 days (Clause 74).
84CReturned to sender immediately if refused (Clause 74).
85CForeign articles (Poste Restante) are kept for 1 month (Clause
65/74 context).
86CReturned Letter Office (Clause 75).
87COpened  by  officers  of  the  RLO  appointed  for  the  purpose
(Clause 75).
88CDestroyed after the prescribed period if sender/addressee can-
not be found (Clause 75).
89BThe Sender is liable (Clause 76).
90CRecovered from the Sender (Clause 76).
91BRecovered as arrears of land revenue (Clause 76).
92AYes, PO can withhold other articles (Clause 76).
93ASection 4 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (Clause 83).
94BLetters sent by a private friend without hire/reward (Clause
83).
95CPermitted without hire or reward (Clause 83).
96BSection 6 of the IPO Act (Clause 84).
97BLiable only for fraud or willful act/default (Clause 84).
98CProhibited from giving info to others (Clause 85).
99BIssued by the Superintendent of Post Offices (Clause 86).
100AClause 86 (and relevant Departmental rules).
101BOnly at the place specified in the license (Clause 86).
102CNo, it is an infringement (Clause 83).
103AArticles with specific return instructions (Clause 74).
104BPunishable under the IPO Act (Section 56/Clause 85).
15www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 73-86)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
105BIn writing (Clause 72/73).
106BDetain other articles addressed to him (Clause 76).
107CNo guarantee is given (Clause 84).
108BNo, strictly prohibited (Clause 86/87).
109BClause 84.
110CClause 74.
16www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART IV: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 87 - 106)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
111.  According  to  Clause  87,  postage  stamps  should  be  affixed  to  which  part  of  the
address side of the article?
(a)  Top left-hand corner
(b)  Top right-hand corner
(c)  Bottom right-hand corner
(d)  Center of the envelope
112.  If  stamps  are  affixed  to  the  back  or  any  other  part  of  the  article  instead  of  the
address side, the article may be:
(a)  Treated as unpaid
(b)  Returned to sender immediately
(c)  Destroyed
(d)  Delivered without penalty
113.  The public is advised to use the minimum number of stamps for the payment of
postage to:
(a)  Save paper
(b)  Leave  space  for  the  address  and
other indications
(c)  Reduce the weight of the article
(d)  Make the article look neat
114.  Stamps perforated with initials can be used for postage provided:
(a)  The  perforation  is  authorized  by
the Head of the Circle
(b)  The perforated stamps are not cut
out from a postcard or embossed
envelope
(c)  The  perforation  is  done  by  the
Post Office only
(d)  They  are  used  only  on  govern-
ment mail
115.  Can Government service stamps be perforated with initials?
(a)  Yes, always
(b)  No, never
(c)  Yes, with special permission
(d)  Only for high-ranking officials
116.  Precanceled stamps are generally valid for use:
(a)  At any Post Office in India
(b)  Only  at  the  Post  Office  of  the
town where they were issued
(c)  Only for Registered mail
(d)  Only for Foreign mail
14www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
117.  The address on a postal article should be written:
(a)  Across the length of the cover
(b)  Parallel to the length of the cover
(c)  Parallel to the width of the cover
(d)  Diagonally
118.  A  margin  of  at  least  how  much  should  be  left  at  the  top  of  the  address  side  for
labels and postage stamps?
(a)  1 cm
(b)  2 cm
(c)  3 cm
(d)  5 cm
119.  In the address, the PIN Code should be written:
(a)  In the first line
(b)  Before the name of the post town
(c)  In the last line
(d)  It is optional
120.  Articles for high officers of Government (like the President or Prime Minister) while
on tour should be addressed to:
(a)  Their official residence in Delhi
(b)  The ”Camp” without adding the
name of the post town
(c)  The nearest Head Post Office
(d)  The Secretariat
121.  Articles for personnel of the Navy should be addressed to:
(a)  The ship’s location
(b)  The  Fleet  Mail  Office,  Bombay
(Mumbai)
(c)  The Ministry of Defence
(d)  C/o 56 APO
122.  The sender’s address should preferably be written:
(a)  On the top right corner
(b)  On  the  bottom  lower  left-hand
corner or on the reverse
(c)  Just  below  the  addressee’s  ad-
dress
(d)  It should not be written to main-
tain privacy
123.  Articles addressed to ”The Christian community” or ”The Muslims” of a town are
treated as:
(a)  Undeliverable articles
(b)  Articles with indefinite address
(c)  Delivered to the head of the com-
munity
(d)  Delivered to the Municipality
124.  An article bearing an indefinite address (e.g., ”Mr.  Smith, India”) is generally:
15www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Sent to the RLO
(b)  Kept in deposit for 3 months
(c)  Not to be circulated but returned
to sender if possible
(d)  Advertised in the newspaper
125.  Sharp instruments can be transmitted by post only if:
(a)  They are insured
(b)  They are securely packed so as not
to injure postal officials
(c)  They are sent as parcels
(d)  They are prohibited completely
126.  Transmission of any article having any indecent,  obscene,  seditious,  or scurrilous
printing or painting is:
(a)  Permitted with extra postage
(b)  Permitted  only  for  medical  pur-
poses
(c)  Strictly prohibited
(d)  Permitted if insured
127.  Which of the following is prohibited for transmission by post?
(a)  Safety matches
(b)  Explosives  and  inflammable  sub-
stances
(c)  Both (a) and (b)
(d)  Neither (a) nor (b)
128.  Which of the following living creatures can be transmitted by post?
(a)  Snakes
(b)  Bees, leeches, and silkworms
(c)  White mice
(d)  Small birds
129.  Transmission of tickets, proposals, or advertisements relating to a lottery is:
(a)  Allowedifthelotteryis
government-authorized
(b)  Prohibited  unless  authorized  by
the Government
(c)  Allowed as ordinary mail only
(d)  Completely unrestricted
130.  Turpentine, Varnish, and similar substances can be sent by post if:
(a)  Packed in a glass bottle only
(b)  Packed in a double container (in-
ner glass/tin, outer box)
(c)  Sent by Letter Post
(d)  They are not allowed at all
131.  Soft solids like ointments, wax, or soap must be packed in:
(a)  A cardboard box only
(b)  An  inner  container  and  an  outer
wooden/metal box
(c)  A plastic bag
(d)  Paper wrapping
16www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
132.  Coin, bullion, precious stones, jewellery, and articles of gold or silver must be sent
by:
(a)  Speed Post
(b)  Registered Post
(c)  Insured Post
(d)  Ordinary Post
133.  If an article containing gold coin or bullion is found to be uninsured (when insurance
is compulsory), it will be:
(a)  Returned to sender
(b)  Confiscated
(c)  Delivered on payment of a fine/fee
(d)  Forwarded to RLO for destruction
134.  What is the maximum value of gold coin or bullion that can be sent by Insured
Post?
(a)  Rs.  10,000
(b)  Rs.  20,000
(c)  Rs.  1,00,000
(d)  Rs.  50,000
135.  Can  a  Registered  Article  be  addressed  to  a  Post  Box  number  only  (without  the
renter’s name)?
(a)  Yes, always
(b)  No, the name of the renter is also
required
(c)  Yes, if it is insured
(d)  Yes, if it is Speed Post
136.  The name of the District is NOT required in the address if:
(a)  The PIN Code is written
(b)  The  article  is  for  a  Presidency
town or a place with a Head Post
Office
(c)  It is a registered letter
(d)  It is sent by air mail
137.  Articles addressed ”Care of” (C/o) a person are delivered to:
(a)  The addressee only
(b)  The person in whose care it is ad-
dressed
(c)  The Post Box of the addressee
(d)  Either the addressee or the person
in whose care it is sent
138.  For articles addressed to foreign countries, the name of the country should be writ-
ten in:
(a)  Small letters
(b)  Capital letters
(c)  Italics
(d)  Parentheses
139.  Liquids having a flash point below 200 degrees Fahrenheit are:
17www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Allowed by air mail
(b)  Allowed by surface mail
(c)  Prohibited
(d)  Allowed if packed in tin
140.  When sending liquids by post, the bottle must be surrounded by:
(a)  Sawdust or absorbent material
(b)  Newspaper only
(c)  Plastic sheet
(d)  Nothing
18www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE (PART IV)
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
111BTop right-hand corner of the address side (Clause 87).
112ATreated as unpaid (Clause 87).
113BTo leave space for address and labels (Clause 88).
114BNot cut from embossed envelopes/cards (Clause 89).
115BNo, Government service stamps cannot be perforated (Clause
89).
116BOnly at the Post Office of the town of issue (Clause 90).
117BParallel to the length of the cover (Clause 91).
118CAt least 3 cm (Clause 91).
119CLast line (Clause 91).
120B”Camp” without post town (Clause 93).
121BFleet Mail Office, Bombay (Clause 94).
122BBottom lower left-hand corner or reverse (Clause 95).
123BArticles with indefinite address (Clause 96).
124CNot to be circulated; returned to sender (Clause 96).
125BSecurely packed to prevent injury (Clause 98).
126CStrictly prohibited (Clause 99).
127CBoth  matches  and  explosives/inflammables  are  prohibited
(Clause 100).
128BBees, leeches, and silkworms are allowed (Clause 101).
129BProhibited unless authorized by Government (Clause 102).
130BPacked in double container (Clause 103).
131BInner container and outer box (Clause 105).
132CMust be insured (Clause 106).
133CDelivered on payment of fine/fees (Clause 106).
134BRs.  20,000 (Clause 106/Clause 48).
135BName of renter is required (Clause 92).
19www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 87-106)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
136BFor Presidency towns/Head POs (Clause 91).
137DDelivered to either (Clause 97).
138BCapital letters (Clause 91).
139CProhibited (Clause 100).
140ASawdust or absorbent material (Clause 104).
20www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 107-131)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART V: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 107 - 131)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
141.  According to Clause 107, which of the following is PROHIBITED to be enclosed in
a letter?
(a)  A single cheque
(b)  A  document  exchanged  between
two persons other than the sender
and the addressee
(c)  A photograph
(d)  A greeting card
142.  The maximum weight of a letter permitted for transmission by post is:
(a)  1 kg
(b)  2 kg
(c)  4 kg
(d)  500 grams
143.  The maximum dimensions of a letter in roll form are:
(a)  Length 80 cm, Length + 2xDiam-
eter = 100 cm
(b)  Length 60 cm, Length + 2xDiam-
eter = 80 cm
(c)  Length  100  cm,  Length  +  2xDi-
ameter = 120 cm
(d)  No specific limit
144.  An unpaid letter is charged on delivery with:
(a)  Single the deficiency
(b)  Double the deficiency
(c)  Triple the deficiency
(d)  A flat fine of Rs.  10
145.  An insufficiently paid letter is charged on delivery with:
(a)  The amount of the deficiency
(b)  Double  the  amount  of  the  defi-
ciency
(c)  The  deficiency  plus  a  handling
charge
(d)  It is returned to the sender
146.  Postcards are primarily intended for:
(a)  Enclosing small documents
(b)  Open communication
(c)  Sending currency notes
(d)  Business samples only
147.  The standard dimensions of a Postcard are:
18www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 107-131)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  14cm× 9cm
(b)  15cm× 10cm
(c)  12cm× 8cm
(d)  20cm× 10cm
148.  Private postcards can be transmitted by post provided:
(a)  They  conform  to  the  dimensions
and thickness of official postcards
(b)  They are completely white
(c)  They  are  certified  by  the  Post-
master
(d)  They are printed by the Govern-
ment Press
149.  Which of the following can be attached to a postcard?
(a)  A small coin
(b)  A photograph, provided it is com-
pletely adherent
(c)  A cheque
(d)  A piece of cloth
150.  If a postcard does not comply with the conditions regarding size or thickness, it is:
(a)  Treated  as  a  Letter  and  charged
accordingly
(b)  Destroyed
(c)  Returned to sender free of charge
(d)  Treated as a Book Packet
151.  In a Reply Postcard, the ”Reply” portion is intended for:
(a)  The sender to write his address
(b)  The addressee to send a reply to
the sender
(c)  Official use only
(d)  Advertising purposes
152.  Can the sender write on the address side of the postcard?
(a)  No, strictly prohibited
(b)  Yes, but only on the left-hand half
(c)  Yes, anywhere
(d)  Only the signature is allowed
153.  A postcard should not be folded, cut, or altered.  If it is folded, it will be treated
as:
(a)  A Letter
(b)  A Book Packet
(c)  An invalid article
(d)  A Packet
154.  Under the Business Reply Service, the postage is paid by:
(a)  The sender
(b)  The addressee (permit holder)
(c)  The Government
(d)  It is a free service
155.  A permit for the Business Reply Service is issued by:
19www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 107-131)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  The Postmaster of the local HO
(b)  The Head of the Division (Super-
intendent)
(c)  The PMG
(d)  The Inspector of Posts
156.  The  annual  fee  for  a  Business  Reply  Service  permit  is  (based  on  standard  exam
data):
(a)  Rs.  100
(b)  Rs.  200
(c)  Rs.  500
(d)  Rs.  1000
157.  The handling charge per article for Business Reply Cards/Envelopes delivered to
the permit holder is:
(a)  Re.  1.00
(b)  Re.  0.50
(c)  Re.  2.00
(d)  Free
158.  Which of the following CANNOT be sent as a Book Packet?
(a)  Newspapers
(b)  Printed books
(c)  Personal  communication  (like  a
letter)
(d)  Manuscripts of books
159.  A Book Packet must bear on the outside the endorsement:
(a)  ”Book Post” or ”Book Packet”
(b)  ”Printed Matter”
(c)  ”Documents Only”
(d)  ”Educational Material”
160.  The dimensions of a Book Packet should not exceed:
(a)  Length   60   cm,   Width   30   cm,
Depth 30 cm
(b)  Length   80   cm,   Width   40   cm,
Depth 40 cm
(c)  Length   45   cm,   Width   30   cm,
Depth 30 cm
(d)  Same as a Letter
161.  The maximum weight of a Book Packet is:
(a)  2 kg
(b)  4 kg
(c)  5 kg
(d)  10 kg
162.  A Book Packet containing periodicals must be registered with the Post Office to
avail concessional rates.  The registration number generally starts with:
(a)  RNI / ...
(b)  L / ...
(c)  P / ...
(d)  B / ...
163.  An unpaid Book Packet is charged on delivery with:
20www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 107-131)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Single the deficiency
(b)  Double the deficiency
(c)  Triple the deficiency
(d)  Returned to sender
164.  Can a Book Packet contain a paper money or postage stamp?
(a)  Yes, if obliterated
(b)  Yes, absolutely
(c)  No, strictly prohibited
(d)  Only if insured
165.  Pattern and Sample Packets are intended for:
(a)  Bona fide trade patterns or sam-
ples of merchandise
(b)  Gifts
(c)  Saleable goods
(d)  Documents
166.  The maximum weight of a Pattern or Sample Packet is:
(a)  1 kg
(b)  2 kg
(c)  4 kg
(d)  500 grams
167.  The size limit for a Pattern and Sample Packet is the same as that for:
(a)  A Postcard
(b)  A Letter
(c)  A Book Packet
(d)  A Parcel
168.  Can a Pattern Packet contain goods for sale?
(a)  Yes, up to Rs.  100
(b)  Yes, if marked ”For Sale”
(c)  No, it must contain only samples
having no commercial value
(d)  Yes, if sent by a registered dealer
169.  ”Competition Postcards” are distinct from ordinary postcards because:
(a)  They are blue in color
(b)  They have a higher postage rate
(c)  They are larger in size
(d)  They   are   only   for   government
competitions
170.  If a person uses the BRS format without a valid permit, the article is:
(a)  Delivered free
(b)  Treated  as  an  unpaid  letter  and
charged double the postage
(c)  Destroyed
(d)  Returned to the sender
21www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 107-131)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE (PART V)
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
141BA letter cannot enclose documents for a third party (Clause
107).
142BMax weight for a letter is 2 kg (Clause 108).
143ALength 80 cm, L + 2D = 100 cm (Clause 108).
144BCharged double the deficiency (Clause 109).
145BCharged double the deficiency (Clause 110).
146BIntended for open communication (Clause 111).
147A14cm× 9cm (Clause 112).
148AMust conform to size and thickness rules (Clause 113).
149BA photograph can be attached if completely adherent (Clause
114).
150ATreated as a Letter (Clause 115).
151BFor the addressee to send a reply (Clause 116).
152BYes, on the left-hand half of the address side (Clause 117).
153ATreated as a Letter if folded/cut (Clause 118).
154BPostage is paid by the addressee (permit holder) (Clause 119).
155BIssued by the Head of the Division (Clause 120).
156BRs.  200 (Standard exam rate) (Clause 121).
157ARe.  1.00 per article handling charge (Clause 122).
158CPersonal   communication   is   prohibited   in   Book   Packets
(Clause 124).
159A”Book Post” or ”Book Packet” (Clause 125).
160A60× 30× 30 cm (Clause 126).
161C5 kg (Clause 127).
162ARNI (Registrar of Newspapers for India) registration (Clause
128 context).
163BDouble the deficiency (Clause 129).
164CProhibited (Clause 130).
22www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 107-131)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
165ABona fide trade patterns/samples (Clause 131).
166B2 kg (Clause 131).
167BSame as a Letter (Clause 131).
168CNo, only samples with no commercial value (Clause 131).
169BHigher postage rate (e.g., used for TV shows) (Clause 112).
170BTreated as unpaid letter (Clause 123).
23www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 132-144)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART VI: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 132 - 144)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
171.  A ”Blind Literature” packet may contain:
(a)  Papers of any kind impressed with
Braille characters
(b)  Sound recordings sent by a blind
person to another blind person
(c)  Plates for impressing Braille char-
acters
(d)  All of the above
172.  Blind Literature Packets are exempt from which of the following charges?
(a)  Postage and Registration fee
(b)  Fee for acknowledgement of deliv-
ery
(c)  Fee  for  the  attested  copy  of  the
receipt
(d)  All of the above
173.  Are air mail charges also exempt for Blind Literature Packets?
(a)  Yes, completely exempt
(b)  No,  air  mail  surcharge  must  be
paid
(c)  Yes, if posted by a government in-
stitution
(d)  Only for foreign mail
174.  The maximum weight permitted for a Blind Literature Packet is:
(a)  2 kg
(b)  5 kg
(c)  7 kg
(d)  10 kg
175.  If a Blind Literature Packet contains any unauthorized enclosure (e.g., a letter), it
is charged on delivery with:
(a)  Double the deficiency for a letter
(b)  Single the deficiency for a letter
(c)  Postage   applicable   to   a   Book
Packet
(d)  A fixed fine of Rs.  50
176.  For a publication to be registered as a ”Newspaper” for postal transmission, it must
be published at intervals of not more than:
(a)  7 days
(b)  15 days
(c)  31 days
(d)  45 days
22www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 132-144)Dak Guru Exclusive
177.  To qualify as a Registered Newspaper, the publication must contain:
(a)  Only advertisements
(b)  Primarily  bona  fide  political  or
other news/articles
(c)  Only fiction stories
(d)  Only market reports
178.  The registration number for a newspaper is allotted by:
(a)  The  Postmaster  of  the  office  of
posting
(b)  The  Superintendent  of  Post  Of-
fices
(c)  The  Head  of  the  Postal  Circle
(PMG/CPMG) or authorized of-
ficer
(d)  The Press Registrar of India
179.  The registration of a newspaper for postal purposes remains valid for:
(a)  1 calendar year (Jan-Dec)
(b)  3 calendar years
(c)  5 years
(d)  Indefinitely
180.  An application for renewal of newspaper registration must be made:
(a)  At least 1 month before expiry
(b)  At least 3 months before expiry
(c)  Any time before expiry
(d)  Within 30 days after expiry
181.  If the application for renewal of newspaper registration is made after the expiry of
the previous license, a late fee is charged.  The late fee is currently:
(a)  Rs.  50
(b)  Rs.  100
(c)  Rs.  500
(d)  Rs.  10
182.  Registered Newspapers must be posted:
(a)  In any letterbox
(b)  Only at the counter of the speci-
fied Post Office on specified days
(c)  At the Railway Mail Service office
only
(d)  Along with ordinary letters
183.  When posting Registered Newspapers, they must be handed over in a packet con-
taining at least how many copies?
(a)  10 copies
(b)  50 copies
(c)  100 copies
(d)  500 copies
184.  A ”Packet of Registered Newspapers” can contain:
(a)  Only one copy of the same news-
paper
(b)  More  than  one copy  of  the  same
issue of a registered newspaper
(c)  Copies    of    different    registered
newspapers
23www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 132-144)Dak Guru Exclusive
(d)  Any book packet
185.  The maximum weight of a packet of Registered Newspapers is:
(a)  2 kg
(b)  5 kg
(c)  10 kg
(d)  20 kg
186.  The weight of an Unregistered Parcel should not exceed:
(a)  2 kg
(b)  4 kg
(c)  10 kg
(d)  20 kg
187.  The maximum weight of a Registered Parcel posted at or addressed to a Head or
Sub Post Office is:
(a)  10 kg
(b)  15 kg
(c)  20 kg
(d)  25 kg
188.  The maximum weight of a Registered Parcel posted at or addressed to a Branch
Post Office (BO) is:
(a)  4 kg
(b)  10 kg
(c)  20 kg
(d)  2 kg
189.  The length of a parcel should not exceed:
(a)  80 cm
(b)  1 meter (100 cm)
(c)  1.5 meters
(d)  1.8 meters
190.  The combined length and girth of a parcel must not exceed:
(a)  1.00 meter
(b)  1.50 meters
(c)  1.80 meters
(d)  2.00 meters
191.  A parcel weighing more than 4 kg must be:
(a)  Posted in a letterbox
(b)  Presented   at   the   Post   Office
counter for registration
(c)  Sent via Speed Post only
(d)  Handed to the postman on beat
192.  If a parcel required to be registered (e.g., above 4 kg) is found in a letterbox, it will
be:
(a)  Returned to the sender
(b)  Treated  as  a  Registered  Parcel
and charged accordingly
(c)  Charged  as  a  Registered  Parcel
plus a compulsory registration fee
(d)  Confiscated
24www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 132-144)Dak Guru Exclusive
193.  The responsibility for ensuring that a parcel is packed securely lies with:
(a)  The Post Office staff
(b)  The Sender
(c)  The Addressee
(d)  The Customs Officer
194.  Human ashes can be transmitted by post provided:
(a)  They are sent as an Insured Par-
cel
(b)  They   are   packed   in   a   water-
proof metal container enclosed in
a wooden box
(c)  They are sent by Speed Post
(d)  Transmission is prohibited
195.  Is the Blind Literature packet exempt from Fee for Attested Copy of Receipt?
(a)  Yes
(b)  No
(c)  Only if requested by sender
(d)  Only for inland mail
196.  If a Registered Newspaper is published on a Sunday, can it be posted on Sunday?
(a)  Yes, at all post offices
(b)  Only  at  Press  Sorting  Offices  /
Night  Post  Offices  authorized  to
accept it
(c)  No, never
(d)  Yes, without late fee
197.  A supplement to a Registered Newspaper must:
(a)  Be printed separately
(b)  Bear the date of the newspaper
(c)  Consist wholly of advertisements
(d)  Weigh more than the newspaper
198.  The minimum size of a parcel is:
(a)  10cm× 7cm
(b)  Same as a letter
(c)  It  must  be  able  to  bear  the  ad-
dress and stamps
(d)  There is no minimum size
199.  A parcel must bear the date stamp of:
(a)  The office of posting only
(b)  The office of posting and the office
of delivery
(c)  Every   sorting   office   it   passes
through
(d)  It does not require date stamping
200.  If a parcel contains liquids, the outer covering must be:
(a)  Cardboard
(b)  Wood or metal
(c)  Cloth
(d)  Plastic
25www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 132-144)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE (PART VI)
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
171DBlind Lit includes Braille papers, sound recordings, and plates
(Clause 132).
172DExempt from postage, registration, acknowledgement, and at-
tested receipt fee (Clause 133).
173BNo, air mail charges must be paid (Clause 133).
174CMax weight is 7 kg (Clause 134).
175AUnauthorized  enclosures  lead  to  charging  as  a  letter/parcel
with penalty (Clause 134).
176CInterval must not exceed 31 days (Clause 135).
177BMust contain bona fide news/political articles (Clause 135).
178CHead  of  the  Circle  (PMG/CPMG)  or  authorized  officer
(Clause 136).
179BValid for 3 calendar years (Clause 137).
180AAt least 1 month before expiry (Clause 137).
181BLate  fee  is  Rs.   100  (Standard  departmental  fee  for  late  re-
newal) (Clause 137).
182BOnly at specified counters on specified days (Clause 138).
183AMinimum 10 copies for un-prepaid; prepaid varies but gener-
ally refers to bulk (Clause 138). *Note: For ”Without Prepay-
ment” system, 500 copies.  For general posting, no minimum
bulk defined unless licensed.*
184BMore than one copy of the same issue (Clause 139).
185BMax weight of newspaper packet is 5 kg (Clause 139).
186BMax weight for unregistered parcel is 4 kg (Clause 140).
187CMax weight for Registered Parcel at HO/SO is 20 kg (Clause
140).
188BMax weight for Registered Parcel at BO is 10 kg (Clause 140).
189BLength not exceeding 1 meter (Clause 141).
190CCombined length and girth not exceeding 1.80 meters (Clause
141).
26www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 132-144)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
191BMust be presented at counter (registration mandatory above
4 kg) (Clause 142).
192BTreated as Registered Parcel and charged (Clause 142).
193BResponsibility lies with the Sender (Clause 143).
194AMust  be  sent  as  Insured  Parcel  in  a  sealed  metal  container
(Clause 144).
195AYes, exempt (Clause 133).
196BOnly at authorized offices (Press Sorting/Night POs) (Clause
138).
197BMust bear the date of the newspaper (Clause 135).
198A10× 7  cm  (same  as  letter)  to  accommodate  stamps/labels
(Clause 141/General Rule).
199BOffice of posting and delivery (Clause 142).
200BWood or metal outer cover is required for liquids (Clause 144).
27www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
PART VII: PRACTICE QUESTIONS
PO REGULATIONS (CLAUSES 145 - 178)
Instructions:  Read each question carefully.  Select the most appropriate option based
on the latest Department of Posts regulations and PO Guide Part I.
201.  According to Clause 145, the Postman is prohibited from delivering any article on
which any sum is due:
(a)  Unless the amount is paid imme-
diately
(b)  Unless   the   addressee   signs   a
promise note
(c)  If the amount exceeds Rs.  100
(d)  Without  the  permission  of  the
Postmaster
202.  Is a Postman bound to give change when receiving payment for a Value Payable
article or customs duty?
(a)  Yes, always
(b)  Yes, if the amount is less than Rs.
50
(c)  No, he is not bound to give change
(d)  Yes, if he has sufficient cash
203.  A Registered Article is delivered to the addressee only after:
(a)  He shows his ID card
(b)  He signs the registered receipt and
acknowledgment (if any)
(c)  He pays a delivery fee
(d)  He visits the Post Office
204.  If the addressee of a Registered Article is illiterate,  his thumb impression or seal
must be:
(a)  Attested by the Postman himself
(b)  Attested   by   a   reliable   witness
known to the Postman
(c)  Attested by the Postmaster
(d)  Not required
205.  When delivering a Registered Article to a Pardanashin woman, her signature must
be attested by:
(a)  The Postman
(b)  A  respectable  witness  known  to
the Postman
(c)  Her husband only
(d)  The Village Headman
206.  If a Registered Article meant for delivery is found to be damaged, the Postman:
26www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Will deliver it and take a remark
(b)  Will not deliver it but issue a no-
tice to the addressee to attend the
PO
(c)  Will return it to the sender imme-
diately
(d)  Will  open  it  in  front  of  the  ad-
dressee
207.  Generally, a Value Payable (VP) article exceeding what amount is NOT entrusted
to the Postman for delivery but requires an intimation to be sent?  (As per standard
PO Guide text)
(a)  Rs.  100
(b)  Rs.  500
(c)  Rs.  1000
(d)  Rs.  5000
208.  If  a  VP  article  is  delivered  at  the  Post  Office  window,  the  addressee  must  take
delivery within:
(a)  3 days
(b)  7 days
(c)  14 days
(d)  1 month
209.  An Insured article is NOT sent out for delivery by Postman if the value insured
exceeds:
(a)  Rs.  100
(b)  Rs.  200
(c)  Rs.  500
(d)  Rs.  1000
210.  For an insured article exceeding the prescribed limit for home delivery, the addressee
is sent:
(a)  The article itself
(b)  An  intimation  to  take  delivery
from the Post Office
(c)  A cheque
(d)  A copy of the receipt
211.  Parcels weighing above
are not usually issued for delivery but are kept at the
PO for window delivery.
(a)  2 kg
(b)  5 kg
(c)  10 kg
(d)  20 kg
212.  If a single addressee receives multiple parcels weighing more than
in aggregate,
they are not sent out for delivery.
(a)  5 kg
(b)  10 kg
(c)  20 kg
(d)  25 kg
213.  Articles on which Customs Duty assessed exceeds
are usually delivered at the
Post Office window.
27www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Rs.  50
(b)  Rs.  100
(c)  Rs.  500
(d)  Rs.  1000
214.  A Money Order is paid to:
(a)  Any  person  residing  at  the  ad-
dress
(b)  The payee named in the order or
his authorized agent
(c)  The sender
(d)  The Village Headman
215.  The payee must sign the Money Order in:
(a)  Ink only
(b)  Pencil
(c)  Ink or Ballpoint pen
(d)  Red ink only
216.  If the payee of a Money Order is illiterate, payment is made on his:
(a)  Verbal assurance
(b)  Thumb  impression  attested  by  a
witness
(c)  Signature of his son
(d)  Signature of the Postman
217.  Money Orders addressed to a minor are generally paid to:
(a)  The minor himself (if old enough)
(b)  The father or lawful guardian
(c)  The mother only
(d)  The minor’s teacher
218.  If a minor is of sufficient age and intelligence to understand the transaction,  can
the Money Order be paid to him?
(a)  Yes, always
(b)  No, never
(c)  Only if the guardian is deceased
(d)  Only  with  the  Postmaster’s  per-
mission
219.  A  Money  Order  that  has  not  been  paid  to  the  payee  or  remitted  to  the  sender
within the validity period becomes:
(a)  Time-barred
(b)  Void
(c)  Forfeited
(d)  Cancelled
220.  If the Postman does not know the payee of a Money Order, he should:
(a)  Refuse payment
(b)  Demand  identification  by  a  per-
son known to the Postman or Vil-
lage Postman
(c)  Ask for an Aadhaar card only
(d)  Pay it at his own risk
221.  A Village Postman is authorized to deliver:
28www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  Only unregistered letters
(b)  Registered letters, Money Orders,
and Parcels (within limits)
(c)  Only Parcels
(d)  Only Government mail
222.  If an addressee refuses to accept a Registered Article, the Postman should:
(a)  Force him to take it
(b)  Record the remark ”Refused” and
return it to the PO
(c)  Throw it in his compound
(d)  Keep it for 7 days
223.  An addressee of a VP article delivered at the window can request detention of the
article for a period of up to:
(a)  3 days
(b)  7 days
(c)  14 days
(d)  1 month
224.  If a VP article is detained at the request of the addressee beyond 7 days, what fee
is charged?
(a)  Late fee
(b)  Demurrage / Warehousing charge
(c)  Registration fee
(d)  No fee
225.  Is any fee charged for the window delivery of parcels exceeding 10 kg?
(a)  Yes, Rs.  5
(b)  Yes, Rs.  10
(c)  No, it is free
(d)  Yes, equal to postage
226.  Can a Money Order be paid to one of two joint payees?
(a)  Yes, on the signature of that one
payee
(b)  No, both must sign
(c)  Yes, if the other is deceased
(d)  Only if authorized by the sender
227.  If the payee of a Money Order dies before payment, the amount is:
(a)  Paid to his neighbor
(b)  Paid to his legal heir on produc-
tion of proof
(c)  Returned to the sender
(d)  Credited  to  Government  Welfare
Fund
228.  A Money Order addressed to a lunatic is paid to:
(a)  The lunatic himself
(b)  Thepersonunderwhose
carethelunaticisliving
(Guardian/Manager)
(c)  The Village Headman
(d)  Returned to sender
229.  When delivering an Insured Article, the addressee must verify:
29www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  The weight only
(b)  That the seals and packing are in-
tact
(c)  The contents inside
(d)  The date stamp
230.  If a payee refuses to take payment of a Money Order, the money is:
(a)  Kept for 7 days
(b)  Returned  to  the  sender  immedi-
ately
(c)  Forfeited
(d)  Given to charity
231.  If a person refuses to pay the postage due on an article delivered to him, the Post
Office can:
(a)  Recover it from his bank account
(b)  Withhold other articles addressed
to him until the due is paid
(c)  Call the police
(d)  File a lawsuit immediately
232.  The document signed by the addressee upon receipt of a Registered Article is called:
(a)  Delivery Slip (RP-54)
(b)  Money Order Form
(c)  Parcel Way Bill
(d)  Despatch List
233.  Signing the acknowledgment for an Insured Article is:
(a)  Optional
(b)  Mandatory
(c)  Mandatory only for values above
Rs.  1000
(d)  Discretionary for the Postman
234.  Can an addressee open a Value Payable article before paying the amount due?
(a)  Yes, to check contents
(b)  No, strictly prohibited
(c)  Yes, if the sender permits
(d)  Yes,  in the presence of the Post-
master
235.  If an addressee suspects a VP article contains nothing of value (fraud), can the Post
Office open it?
(a)  Yes, on request
(b)  No,  the  Post  Office  takes  no  re-
sponsibility for contents
(c)  Yes, if the police are present
(d)  Yes, if the sender agrees
236.  If an addressee refuses to accept a damaged Insured Article delivered at the window,
what happens?
30www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  It is returned to sender
(b)  An inventory of contents is taken
in his presence
(c)  It is destroyed
(d)  He is forced to take it
237.  Can a Postman accept a cheque for payment of a VP article or Customs duty?
(a)  Yes
(b)  No, only cash is accepted
(c)  Yes, if certified
(d)  Yes, for amounts over Rs.  1000
238.  Can a Money Order be paid to the servant of the payee?
(a)  Yes, if he has a letter of authority
(b)  Yes, if the servant is known to the
Postman
(c)  No, unless the payee has executed
a written authority in favor of the
servant
(d)  Yes, always
239.  Special arrangements for payment of Money Orders exist for:
(a)  Government offices
(b)  Planters / Hill Stations
(c)  Schools
(d)  Hospitals
240.  If a foreign parcel contains prohibited items, it is:
(a)  Delivered with a warning
(b)  Handed over to Customs Author-
ities
(c)  Returned to sender
(d)  Burnt
241.  If a VP article is returned as refused, can the sender ask for it to be delivered again?
(a)  No, once refused it is returned
(b)  Yes, by paying a fresh posting fee
(c)  Yes, free of cost
(d)  Only if the addressee apologizes
242.  Poste Restante parcels are kept for:
(a)  7 days
(b)  1 month
(c)  3 months
(d)  15 days
243.  The witness for the delivery of a registered article to an illiterate person must be:
(a)  A postal employee
(b)  A person known to the Postman
and the addressee (preferably)
(c)  The sender
(d)  Any passerby
244.  For payment of MO to a Pardanashin woman, the witness must be:
31www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
(a)  A woman
(b)  A respectable person of the same
village known to the Postman
(c)  Her husband
(d)  The Village Guard
245.  Delivery of an article is considered complete when:
(a)  It reaches the destination Post Of-
fice
(b)  It is handed over to the addressee
or his agent
(c)  The Postman leaves the PO
(d)  The addressee sees the article
246.  Does the witness for a Pardanashin woman’s delivery need to see the woman?
(a)  Yes, face to face
(b)  No, he just needs to testify to her
identity/seal
(c)  Yes, through a screen
(d)  No specific rule
247.  Is there a limit on the amount of Money Order paid to a minor?
(a)  Yes, Rs.  1000
(b)  No  specific  limit  in  PO  Guide
(discretionary   based   on   intelli-
gence)
(c)  Yes, Rs.  500
(d)  Yes, Rs.  5000
248.  Insured articles up to what value can be delivered by the Village Postman?
(a)  Rs.  500
(b)  Rs.  600 (Current limit for BO)
(c)  Rs.  200
(d)  Rs.  100
249.  Before paying a Money Order, the Postman must check:
(a)  The date of issue
(b)  That the amount and name agree
with the list/form
(c)  The sender’s address
(d)  The weather
250.  If the identity of the payee is doubtful, payment of the Money Order should be:
(a)  Made immediately
(b)  Refused/Withheld  until  satisfac-
tory proof is given
(c)  Made to the neighbor
(d)  Returned to sender
32www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
ANSWER KEY & RATIONALE (PART VII)
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
201AUnless the amount due is paid immediately (Clause 145).
202CNot bound to give change (Clause 146).
203BSigns receipt and acknowledgment (Clause 147).
204BAttested by a reliable witness known to the Postman (Clause
149).
205BRespectable witness known to the Postman (Clause 150).
206BIssue notice to addressee to attend PO (Clause 151).
207BRs.  500 (Clause 152).  *Note:  Modern executive orders often
allow up to Rs.  5000, but standard text says Rs.  500 intima-
tion.*
208B7 days (Clause 152).
209CRs.  500 (Clause 153).
210BIntimation to take delivery from PO (Clause 153).
211C10 kg (Clause 158).
212B10 kg in aggregate (Clause 158).
213CRs.  500 (typically aligned with VP/Insured limits in guide).
*Some editions say Rs 50, but generally higher now.  Rs 500
is the safe book answer.*
214BPayee or his authorized agent (Clause 162).
215CInk or Ballpoint pen (Clause 162).
216BThumb impression attested by witness (Clause 163).
217BFather or lawful guardian (Clause 165).
218AYes,  can  be  paid  to  minor  if  of  sufficient  age/intelligence
(Clause 165).
219BVoid (Clause 169).
220BDemand identification by a person known to Postman (Clause
170).
221BRegd letters, MOs, and Parcels (Clause 171).
222BRemark ”Refused” and return (Clause 148).
33www.dakguru.com

MCQs on PO Regulations (Clauses 145-178)Dak Guru Exclusive
Q.No  Ans  Rationale/Reference (PO Guide Part I)
223B7 days (Clause 152).
224BDemurrage / Warehousing charge (Clause 152).
225CNo fee for window delivery (Clause 158).
226BNo, both must sign (Clause 162).
227CReturned to the sender (Clause 173).
228BGuardian/Manager (Clause 174).
229BSeals and packing are intact (Clause 154).
230BReturned to sender immediately (Clause 168).
231BWithhold other articles (Clause 145).
232ADelivery Slip (RP-54) (Clause 147 context).
233BMandatory (Clause 155).
234BNo, strictly prohibited (Clause 152).
235BNo, PO takes no responsibility (Clause 152).
236BInventory of contents taken in presence (Clause 156).
237BNo, only cash (Clause 146).
238CNo, unless written authority exists (Clause 162).
239BPlanters (Clause 175).
240BHanded to Customs (Clause 160).
241ANo, returned immediately (Clause 152).
242A7 days (Clause 158).
243BPerson known to Postman and addressee (Clause 149).
244BRespectable person of same village (Clause 164).
245BHanded over to addressee/agent (Clause 145).
246BTestify to identity/seal (Clause 150).
247BNo specific limit (Clause 174).
248BRs.  600 (BO limit) (Clause 153/BO Rules).
249BAmount and name agree (Clause 162).
250BRefused/Withheld (Clause 170).
34www.dakguru.com