A Self Learning Portal

www.dakguru.com

Financial Handbook Volume-II

DISCLAIMER: This booklet has been prepared strictly from an examination point of view. While every effort
has been made to ensure accuracy and the inclusion of recent changes, amendments, and updates to the
relevant Acts, Rules, and Regulations, this document is intended as a study aid only. Readers and students
are strongly recommended to refer to official government sources or gazettes for the most reliable and
authoritative information.

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

FINANCIAL HAND BOOK VOLUME II
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY
Rule 1. Scope and Applicability
The procedure relating to initial and compiled Accounts of Post Offices (PO) & Railway
Mail Service (RMS). The classification of transactions into 15 digits Head of Account of
Department of Posts (DOP). The rules relating to the Post Office & RMS initial off-line &
on-line transactions Account and the compilation of the relevant Treasury Rules have
been included in this Handbook.
Rule 2. Definitions
1. The Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO): The designated Authority in any
unit of DOP who is responsible for drawing bills, all money received or disbursed
and making payments in his office and the maintenance & submission of accounts
to the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) through the Circle Postal Accounts
Office.
2. Non-Cheque Drawing DDOs (NCDDOs): The DDOs which have not been vested
with cheque drawing powers. Viz. Regional Office (RO), Circle Office (CO), PLI
Directorate, Head Record Office (HRO) in RMS.
3. Head of Postal Accounts Office: The Head of an Office of Accounts subordinate
to Head of Circle and responsible for scrutiny, review, monitoring, and
reconciliation of e-accounts rendered by DDOs/NCDDOs & submission thereof to
CGA.
4. The "Bank": Means any office or branch of the Banking Department of the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI), any branch of the State Bank of India (SBI) acting as the agent
of the RBI.
5. The Secretary: Means Secretary, Department of Posts.
6. The Director General: Means the Director-General of Department of Posts.
7. The Department: Means the Department of Posts.
8. The Government: Means the Central Government.

2

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

9. The Head of a Circle: Means a Chief Postmaster General (CPMG) of a Circle,
Department of Posts and/or any other Officer specifically declared as such by the
Competent Authority.
10. The Head of a Department: Any authority declared under S. R. 2(10). The
President has declared the Director-General of Department of Posts to be Head of
the Department.
11. Treasury: Includes a sub-Treasury.
12. Head of Accounts (15 digits): The classification structure is as follows:
Classification

Digits

Major Heads

4 Digits

Sub-Major Heads 2 Digits
Minor Heads

3 Digits

Sub-Heads

2 Digits

Detailed Heads

2 Digits

Object Heads

2 Digits

13. Postmaster-General: Includes CPMG, PMG, Regional PMG, Director of Postal
Services (DPS).
14. Railway Mail Service: Carriage of mails by road, air, river and train and collection
and distribution of mails.
15. Superintendent: Includes Superintendent (SP) & Senior Superintendent (SSP) of
Post Offices and Superintendent (SRM) & Senior Superintendent (SSRM) of RMS,
direct subordinate of DPS/PMG/CPMG.
16. Head Post Office (HPO): Account office of sub office and Branch office and the
Officer in-charge of a Head Office is designated a Head Postmaster.
17. General Post Office (GPO): The First-class Head Office situated at the
Headquarters of the Head of a Circle or, where there is more than one such Head
Office, the one attached to the HQ, is termed GPO.
3

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

18. Sub-Office: A sub-office is a Post Office subordinate to and in account with a Head
Office. The officer in-charge of a sub-office is designated a Sub Postmaster (SPM).
19. Branch Office: A Branch Office is a Post Office of lower status than a sub-office. It
is in direct account with a Head or sub-office. The Office in-charge is Branch
Postmaster (BPM).
20. Transit Office: Any Post Office which is situated on a line of through mail
communication, and receives and sorts bags intended for offices in advance,
without opening them, is a transit office.
21. Transit Mail Office (TMO): A branch of RMS where closed bags are received and
dispatched, sorting of letters is not done in this unit. Mail Agent or Mail Guard is
in charge of this unit.
22. Computerized Transit Mail Office: These Offices are called Computerized TMOs.
23. Sorting Office: Where work of sorting of articles is done.
24. Automatic Mail Processing Centers (AMPC): Sorting machines have been
provided which have high speed of sorting.
25. Computerized Registration Centers (CRC): The Registration Branch of the Mail
Office, where the processing of registration work is done on computers, is called
Computerized Registration Sorting Centre (CRC).
26. Sorting sub-office: Where the work of sorting is done.
27. Returned Letter Office (RLO): A Returned Letter Office is established at the
Headquarters of a Postal Circle.
28. Transcription Centre: A transcription center is a cell established in a Sorting
Office, situated normally at the Headquarters of the Circle.
29. Office of Exchange: Offices of exchange of transit bags, Foreign Post Offices and
Sub-Foreign Post Offices.
30. Foreign Post Office: An office of exchange in which the work of assessment of
customs duty on foreign mails is also carried out.

4

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

31. Sub-Foreign Post Office: Such sub-Foreign Post Offices are opened mainly for the
convenience of senders and addressees who may be required to present
documents, etc., for the release or dispatch of their foreign articles.
32. Mail Office: Mail Offices are stationary offices of the RMS and are of two kinds,
viz., Sorting Mail Offices (SMO, HSA is in charge) and Transit Mail Offices (TMO,
Mail Agent is in charge).
33. Corporate Mail Office or Bulk Mail Centre (CMO/BMC): Corporate Mail
Offices/Bulk Mail Centers are opened in big cities. Each Bulk Mailer, i.e., a firm
which is capable of posting of 5000 unregistered articles / 250 registered articles
at a time.
34. Mass Mailing Centre (MMC): This Centre is receiving the loose letters, circulars
and blank envelopes separately from the customers and help them in writing the
addresses, enclose the circulars/letters inside the envelopes, affixing the postage
stamps/franking the mail. For this purpose, the MMC may engage the assistance
of college students, house-wives, pensioners, etc., on payment of some amount on
hourly basis.
35. Record Office: A Record Office is a stationary office of the RMS where the work
papers of the sections attached to it are prepared, checked and placed on record.
36. Head Record Office: It is a stationary office situated at the HQ of RMS Division.
The preparation work of salary and contingent bills for the entire Division is done
on HRO Level.
37. Sub-Record Office: A sub-record office is a stationary office of the Railway Mail
Service, situated at the same station as a Mail Office.
38. Account Bag: An account bag is used between a sub-office and its Head Office to
enclose cash bags and articles, documents, etc. from the Head Office to one of its
sub-offices and vice versa. (HO to SO: S.O. Slip & SO to HO: S.O. daily account).
Account bags are due bags.
39. Branch Office Bag: A branch office bag is used between a branch office and its
account office to enclose cash bags and all articles, documents, etc. Branch office
bags are due bags.

5

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

40. Cash Bag: A cash bag is used to enclose remittances of cash between Post Offices.
Cash bags are not due bags.
41. Overtime Duty: Overtime duty means the duty performed under the orders of the
SRM, ASP, IRM or Record Officer by a SA, Mail Guard, MTS, other staff of the
RMS after the completion of prescribed term of duty.
42. Digital Payments: Funds flow directly from one account to another and is
Faceless, Paperless, and Cashless. Digital Payment transactions can be done
through:
Mode

Description

BHIM

Bharat Interface for Money

BHIM Aadhaar (AEPS) Aadhaar Enabled Payment System
Bharat QR Code

Bharat Quick Response Code

UPI

Unified Payments Interface

USSD

Unstructured Supplementary Service Data

IMPS

Immediate Payment Service

Debit/Credit Cards

Electronic Cards

NEFT

National Electronic Funds Transfer

RTGS

Real Time Gross Settlement

CHAPTER II: SUPPLY OF STAMPS
Rule 4. Fixation of Stock Limits
Minimum and Maximum stock of Stamps are fixed by:


Non-Gazetted Postmasters: Divisional Head



Group 'B' Postmasters: Director of Postal Services (DPS)

6

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material


FHB Vol - II

Group 'A' Postmasters: CPMG/PMG

Note: The word "stamps" in this rule includes postage stamps, non-postal stamps,
envelopes and Post cards.
Rule 5. Procurement by Head Post Offices
Head Post Offices will obtain their supply of stamps, not exceeding their respective
authorized maximum stamp balances, from the Postal Stores Depot (PSD). Head Post
Offices will obtain their requirement of Revenue stamps from Treasuries on payment of
cash.
Rule 6. Supply of Stamps from Stamp Depot
(a) The Head Post Offices within the jurisdiction of PSD obtain their supplies of Postage
Stamps, Postal Stationery, and other type of Stamps. The Head post office shall follow
end-to-end electronic process of procurement, sales, inventory, transfer, verification, etc.
(b) On receipt of stamps and Postal Stationery from the PSD, the Head Postmaster or any
other person authorized shall check and verify the articles received with the invoice and
return one copy of invoice to PSD not later than 3 days of the receipt of the supply.
(c) The face value of the articles received from the Postal Stores Depot shall be entered in
the Stock register as Receipt from the Stores depots.
(d) The PSD shall furnish the data of stamps supplied to HPO in a month in e-format to
the CPAO for verification to ensure that the supply is received at HPO and accounted in
the stock register not later than 3 days of the receipt of each supply.
(e) Unserviceable stocks of stamps and stationery shall be exchanged for serviceable ones
of the same kind from the Postal Stores Depot. The surplus stocks of stamps and
stationery shall be returned by the post offices to the Postal Stores Depot for exchange
with other denomination of stamps actually required.
Rule 7. Supply of Commemorative Stamps
Commemorative stamps are supplied by Nasik Security Press to certain Philatelic
Bureaus and Presidency Post offices.

7

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

(a) The Nasik Press will dispatch the supplies to the designated Post Office accompanied
by an invoice in triplicate. One copy of the invoice shall also be forwarded direct to the
Postal Accounts Office of the Post Office by the press.
(b) Two acknowledged copies of the invoice will be returned to Nasik Press immediately
on opening and verifying the supplies. The two copies should be marked first copy and
second copy.
Rule 10. Loss or Damage of Stamps
When postage stamps and stationery are lost or damaged, or become useless or obsolete,
the value thereof should be written off under the orders of the competent authority. The
stock account is updated accordingly. In every case of write off, a copy of the order is
communicated to the PAO with a copy to PSD.
Philately Rules
Rule 11. Definition: Philately is an art of systematically collecting and studying stamps
and postal stationeries including research activities on stamps & other philatelic
products.
Rule 12. Types of Stamps:


Definitive stamps: Issued for day-to-day use as postage for availing postal
services by customers and such stamps are reprinted when exhausted.



Commemorative stamps: Issued to commemorate certain events, personalities,
themes, flora, and fauna etc., and they are not reprinted when the stock is
exhausted.

Rule 13. Philatelic Bureau: It is a branch of a HO or SO specifically setup by the
Department to deal with the receipt and sale of all philatelic items like
special/commemorative stamps, first day covers, special covers, new issues in definitive
stamps, and new stationery etc. It also provides special cancellations on first day covers
and special covers. It maintains Philatelic Deposit Accounts.
Rule 14. Philatelic Counters: It is a counter for sale of philatelic items. A philatelic
counter is functioning in each Head Post Office. These counters offer registration facility
for opening Philatelic Deposit account with supply of material by the Parent bureau.

8

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 15. Philately Deposit Account Scheme: Philately Deposit Account can be opened
at Philatelic Bureau or Philatelic counter of HO. An amount of Rs. 200/- has been
prescribed as Security deposit in Philatelic Deposit Account.
Rule 16. Special Cover: An event which is not nationally important enough to be
commemorated by issue of a Commemorative/Special stamp. Department will issue
Special Covers which can be cancelled with a special cancellation at the post office.
Rule 17. My Stamps: It is the brand name for personalized sheets of commemorative
postage stamps of India Post. The personalization is achieved by printing a thumb nail
photograph of the customer images and logo of institutions, or images of artwork,
heritage buildings, famous tourist places, historical cities, wildlife, other animals and
birds etc.
Rule 19. Railway Mail Service Offices (Supply)
The supply of required stamps as per the authorized limit shall be made by the
designated post office as advance supply to a mail office of the RMS, SRO or HRO having
Mail Office under him should be required to grant a receipt countersigned by the
Superintendent, RMS for the value of the stamps supplied to him and it is renewed on
1st April every year.
CHAPTER III: REVENUE RECEIPTS
Postal Revenue
Rule 20. Classification of Revenue
The Department earns revenue under Major Head 1201 (The First Four digits of 15-digit
CGA Head of Account). The areas include sale of the following products and services
from segments like mail operation (Traditional and Business Development), Postal
Savings Bank Operations, and other allied services.
Postage Collection: The postage collection is done through any of the following modes
for the services rendered by Department of Posts:


Cash, Cheque, and DD.



Digital modes: Debit/credit card, Net banking, UPI Payments, live QR/QR code,
POSB debit, etc. (digital mode where applicable).
9

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II



Franking.



Book Now Pay Later and advance payments.



Posting of Registered Newspaper without prepayment of postage.

Registered Newspaper License:


License granted by Head of Circle/Head of the Regions. A copy of the license
should be sent by the Head of Circle to the Postal Accounts Office concerned with
particulars of the organization and the amount of Security Deposits accepted and
form.



If the license is cancelled, these facts may be intimated to the Circle Postal
Accounts Office by Circle Office / Regional Office.



The office of posting will prepare fortnightly (i.e., for 1st to 15th and 16th to the
end of each month) bills in form MS-98 and present the bill to the newspaper on
the 16th and 1st of each month.



The license should be deemed to have been cancelled if the bill remains unpaid by
the end of the fortnight following the fortnight to which it relates.

Rule 21. Franking Services
The Fee for applying for a new license is Rs. 375. Renewal Fee for the expired license is
Rs. 475. This will be a postal receipt and credited to 1201-00-800-42-35-00.
Rule 22. Book Now Pay Later Facility (BNPL)


Bulk customers are eligible for credit facility to avail Speed Post and Business Post
facility.



Bulk customer is defined as anyone who provides Rs. 10,000 worth of speed post
business or business post or combination of both in a calendar month at a Speed
Post booking office.



The contract will be applicable for a period of one year and the approving
authority shall renew the contract on an annual basis.

10

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material


FHB Vol - II

The BNPL bill will be prepared on a monthly basis (Calendar month) by the office
of posting.



The bill will be raised by the 7th day of the following month (bill date). The bulk
customer shall pay the bill amount in full on or before the last day of the month in
which the bill is raised.



In case the customer fails to make the payment by the due date, penalty at the rate
of 12% per annum on the amount of the bill amount shall be imposed from the bill
date.

Rule 23. Unpaid Postage
Unpaid and insufficiently paid letters and newspapers are taxed by the Postmaster and
the amounts so realized are credited in accounts of the offices of the delivery under the
head - Postage realized in cash for ordinary services (1201-00-101-01-01-00).
Rule 24. Postal Receipt
The various sources of postal receipts from various segments like postal operations,
Financial Services, Post Office Insurance services, and other allied services operating
third-party transactions include:


Postage realized in cash for ordinary services: Sale of PC, ILC, envelope, Register
Newspapers, Book Packet, sample packet, Recall of article, late fee, Unpaid
postage etc.



Speed Post: SP document, SP Parcel, SP-COD, POD etc.



Business Post



Logistic Post: FTL and LTL



Business Parcel



Cash on Delivery



Direct Post



Media Post



Bill Mail Service
11

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II



Free Post Service



International Mail Service



Commission on e-Money Orders



Commission on IFS Money Order



Rent of Post Boxes and Bags



Commission on sale of Indian Postal Orders



Greeting Post



Sale of Postage Stamps



Sale of Service Stamps



PRC for print to post service



Commission on Field Postal Orders



Retail Post



Philately



e-Post Services



National Bill Mail Service



Revenue from Common Service Centre



Forfeited Money Orders



Forfeited Indian Postal Orders



Customs Duty-Postal Fee



Commission on Aadhaar Services



Commission on sale of Railway Tickets (PRRS)



Revenue from management of SB accounts and certificates



Recovery on PLI & RPLI Business

12

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II



Revenue from DOP E-Payment's solutions



Sale of Revenue Stamps



Sale of Sovereign Gold Bonds



Postage realized for mail business service for e-iod



Interchange fee for interoperable ATM transactions



Fees from contractors



Other Receipts: Other items, E-commerce portal, Magazine post, Commission on
account of IMT Transactions of WUMT (WUMT is discontinued).

CHAPTER IV: POST OFFICE ACCOUNTS
Rule 25. Duties and Responsibilities of the Treasurer
The treasurer is solely responsible for the safe custody during working hours of all the
money, articles, documents, and property contained in the office safe from which current
transactions are carried on, and for the correctness of the Treasurer's Cash Book. In offices
where there is a reserve safe, he is jointly responsible with the Postmaster for the safe
custody of the cash, etc., kept in the reserve safe or outside the reserve safe.
Duties of Treasurer include:
1. To supply funds from the office cash to subordinate offices (BO, SO, NDTSO etc.),
postmen, and village postmen of the Head office and to other branches of HPO.
2. To take over under receipt, account bags from the delivery PA and Branch office
bags from the mail.
3. To receive from the postmen, village postmen, and window Delivery Postal
Assistant, collections on account of letter and parcel postage, registration fee and
customs duty, with the relative postal fee realized on foreign parcels and
redirection fees on parcels, unpaid money orders money from postman.
4. Consolidation of DOP cash wherever multiple treasurers exist.

13

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

5. Processing and accounting for Drawings from bank and Remittance to bank in
cash through system-designed workflow in Treasurers Cash Book.
6. Ensure correctness of Drawings from Bank (cash) and Remittance to bank by crossreference to e-statement downloaded from the bank Portal and obtain signature of
Postmaster on day-to-day basis.
7. Remittance of cash and cheque to offices linked like CO, RO, MMS, PSD, and P&T
audit on receipt of indent/e-indent through system process.
8. Supply of cash on approval for ATM cash loading agency or any other agency
designated.
9. Maintain e-treasurers Cash Book and ensure that the closing DOP cash balance
matches with Physical cash on hand.
10. Jointly responsible for safe custody of cash; insured articles and such other articles
to be kept in safety including out of account sums.
11. Receipt, issue, stock, and requisition including maintenance of e-records for
definitive stamps and stationery including commemorative stamps.
12. Remittance of cash and cheque to SOs and BOs as applicable and watch for the
system acknowledgments and cash in transit.
13. Submission of all vouchers to Accounts section against which disbursement
effected directly by treasurer.
14. Maintenance of error book and documenting such errors, omissions, and
commissions.
15. Re-issue of cheque in lieu of cancelled and revalidations of cheques.
16. COD biller online/offline payments.
17. Cheque book supply to subordinate offices.
18. Issue letter of credit/limit in case of subordinate SOs who are having
drawing/Remittance Bank account.
19. Opening of cash Bags and its accounting.

14

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

20. Daily maintenance of e-stamp balance register for definitive and commemorative
stamps.
Rule 26. e-Treasurer's Cash Book (ZFBL3N)
1. E-Treasurer's Cash Book (Form ACG-2) is intended for the entry of all sums
(including stamps) actually received and paid by the Treasurer. All transactions
under the heads, Receipts and Payments, should be serially numbered.
2. Actual cash transactions only will be entered in the Treasurer's Cash Book.
Receipts and payments by book transfer should not be entered.
Rule 28. Balancing the Cash Book
Both sides of the e-Treasurer's Cash Book should be totaled for the day and balanced, the
closing balance being written in words, and the book being signed both by the Treasurer
and the Head Postmaster below the closing balance. Daily Transaction Report (DTR) for
the day should tally with the treasurer cash Book closing balance and the treasurer and
the postmaster are jointly responsible for the accuracy and corresponding physical cash
balance in the treasury.
Rule 29. Authorization of Payments
Before giving cash to any of the officials, the Treasurer must obtain the initials of the Head
Postmaster, or in his absence, any other officer specifically authorized in that behalf,
against the entry of the sum in his cash book in token that the payment is authorized by
the latter. Cash to be made over to another official of the Head office should always be
given to him directly, and not through a third person.
Rule 30. Bank Account Reconciliation
Where a post office is attached with a bank Account for drawl of funds and remittance of
surplus cash, it shall be ensured by the Treasurer and Postmaster that the fund is
accounted correctly in the books of the bank & in the treasurer cash book respectively on
the day of remittance with reference to the e-bank statement which is generated from the
respective bank website/portal for which postmaster should get authorization. It shall be
the joint responsibility of Treasurer and Postmaster and this work is in addition to the
work of Bank reconciliation.

15

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 32. Daily Adjustment of Treasurers Accounts
(a) The Treasurer is strictly prohibited from keeping running accounts with the PAs,
Postmen, and GDS. All amounts advanced to the Counter PAs by the Treasurer, or
received by them during the day on account of e-money orders, Indian Postal Orders,
Saving Bank, Post office certificates, or other transactions, or as postage due on articles
received for delivery, etc., must as an absolute rule be adjusted before the office is closed.
(b) It is the Treasurer's duty to receive the collections on account of letter and parcel
postage and customs duty, with relative postal fee, from Postmen and GDS directly and
not through any of the PAs. The accounts with the Postmen must be adjusted daily at the
hour fixed by the Head Postmaster, and with the village postmen immediately on their
return to the post office.
Rule 33. Payment of Money
(a) The bill or other documents presented as a claim for money will be received and
examined by the accountant, and then laid before the Postmaster; no payment is made
except under the written order of Postmaster.
(b) After payment order has been signed by the Postmaster on the bill or other document,
he shall indicate on the bill mode of payment i.e., whether in cash, by cheque, or by bank
Draft/Government Drafts, enter it in his cash Book, deface the stamp with the date stamp,
and stamp it with the Cash Paid stamp.
Note: Deputy Postmasters are authorized to sign payment orders on occasions when the
Head Postmaster is away from office during office hours.
Rule 36. Payments of Head Record Clerks of the RMS
(a) When an establishment or contingent bill, or a receipt for advance, prepared by Head
Record clerk of the Railway Mail Service is presented at the Head Post Office with a
remittance memorandum in the prescribed form (ACG.34) duly signed, for payment in
cash or by Service money orders, the Head Postmaster should, after examining the
continuity of the bill numbers, stamp, and issue the cash and Service money orders
required, and return the bill or receipt to the Head Record Officer.
(b) To ensure disbursement, on the last working day of each month, except in case of
March, the Head Record Officer will present at the Head Post office attached, two or three

16

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

days before close of each month, the system processed salary details for effecting online
transfer of disbursements through POSB (CBS) or bank as the case may duly tallying the
entries.
Rule 37. Responsibility for Accounts
The Head Postmaster is personally responsible that the DTR for the office is correctly and
punctually generated on the day following that to which the entries relate and generally
that his accounts are correct and the closing balance of DOP cash tallies with the actual
physical cash balance held in the office. He shall ensure that no transactions done off-line
and on-line are missed to be incorporated in the day's account. If any transaction is not
incorporated in account or concerned correct GL code brought into the accounts
immediately, it must be done before the month accounts are closed.
Rule 38. Verification of DTR
The entries in the DTR must be verified by the Head Postmaster himself except when
under the special orders of the Head of Circle or PMG has been allowed to delegate the
duty of verifying the DTR to one of his subordinates. When the duty of verifying the DTR
is delegated to the subordinates employed in the office, the Head Postmaster must
himself check at least two totals under each of the heads-receipts and payments in the
DTR before he submits the accounts to Circle Postal Accounts Office. The two entries so
examined should be marked by him "Examined" before he signs the DTR.
Rule 39. Entry in Accounts


Every item received or paid must at once be brought in a register or e-schedule
subsidiary to the daily transaction Report as a line item and numbered in a
consecutive daily series for each e-schedule or register.



The corresponding e-returns for the CPAO should be checked, in order to ensure
their punctual dispatch on due dates.



It shall be ensured by the Head Postmaster that total for the day of all receipts and
payments (Head Post Office plus Sub Post Offices plus Branch Post offices and any
other unit) are correctly depicted in the classified abstract as generated through
system and accompanied bills/vouchers/lists/journals etc. are available.

17

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 40. Consolidation of Accounts
Post Offices are, for account purposes, divided into three classes, namely:
(a) Branch Post Offices: Which perform transactions and reporting to what is technically
known as their Account office, be either a sub office or a Head office. Branch office shall
submit all related transaction documents to Account office. Account office ensures that
proper accounting of cash transactions done by Branch post offices in digital mode like
collection and disbursement of IPPB deposits & payments respectively. Verification and
checking the correctness of closing balance as in the DTR of the Branch post office shall
be the responsibility of its account's office.
(b) Sub Post Offices including MDG: The sub post offices & MDG are in account with
Head office for meeting its cash/fund requirement. Sub office including MDG shall
submit all related transaction documents, vouchers, e-lists, and details to head office in
support of its transactions for the day to HPO. Verification of closing balance for the day
of its office and Branch offices under it lies with sub post master with reference e-records
and documents available and received from Branch offices.
(c) Head Offices: The head office is responsible for checking of transactions under
various segments done by Sub offices or branch office Savings bank (CBS) Manual, PLI,
postal operation & logistic segments as per. Verification of closing balance for the day of
its office and sub offices & Branch offices under it lies with head office with reference erecords and documents available and received from sub and branch offices. HPO is
responsible for consolidation of e-account and submitted to CPAO on due date.
Rule 41. Daily Transaction Report (ZFR DAY_NEW)


The DTR is the account of Head of Account wise cash receipts and disbursements
of the offices, opening balance plus receipts under various heads of account
equating with payments under various heads of accounts plus closing balance for
each day.



The total of schedule agrees with the figures as in DTR for the day.



Each type of Postal unit performing transactions shall ensure verification of Daily
Transaction report and its correctness.

18

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 42. Unpaid Postal Abstract


In Head Offices, the total postage due on all unregistered articles of the letter mail
received for delivery must be carefully calculated by the Postmaster himself and
entered in the Unpaid Postage Abstract Form ACG.45 (revised) in the column
headed "Total postage due on articles of the letter mail received this day." The
postage realized on unpaid or insufficient articles shall be accounted under major
head 1201-postage realized in cash for ordinary services.



Unpaid and insufficiently paid articles, if intercepted under the orders of a District
Magistrate, are handed over to the authority concerned without realization of the
postage due.

Rule 46. Head Office Classified Cash Book (T-code S_PL0_86000030)
(a) The transactions are classified at point of source i.e., point of transaction. The erstwhile
Head office Cash Book is called Head Office Classified Cash Book as the transactions are
classified system driven.
(b) The Head Office Classified Cash Book (Form No. ACG.4) is a record of the
transactions of the head office including the transactions of the subordinate offices within
the jurisdiction of Head Office. The other items under heads "Receipts" and "Payments"
will be drawn up directly from the Head Office, Sub-Office and Branch Office
transactions for the day.
(c) The daily totals of the Head office, Sub-office, and Branch office transactions Head of
account wise will be added together in Head Office classified Cash Book.
(d) Progressive totals should also be made from the 1st to the end of the month.
(e) The daily balance of the Head Office classified Cash Book is composed will be shown
in the Postmaster's Balance Sheet.
(f) The Postmaster's Balance sheet show the actual balance of Head office with part of
cash including BO, SO and cash or stamps under transit. The Postmaster balance sheet
must be written up by the Head Postmaster personally and signed by him after he has
verified the accuracy of his accounts.

19

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 47. Schedules of Receipts and Payments
(a) In a computerized operation, e-schedule of Receipts and payments is available under
each head of account for all the products and services that department operates including
attached statutory taxes.
(b) Postmaster or any officer in charge of any other unit is responsible to ensure that the
total of the schedule figure for the day & month tallies with DTR/Head office classified
cash book and monthly classified abstract.
Rule 48. e-schedules
Two types of e-schedule receipt and payments.


The schedules relating to payments on account of PLI and RPLI, off cycle
payments/bills paid should be submitted to Circle PAO on the 16th of same month
period of 1st to 15th of that month and on 1st of following month of 16th to last
day of the previous month.



In the case of the schedules which have to be submitted to the Postal Accounts
Office twice a month, the monthly total should be shown in the schedule for the
second period.



Monthly Total: Total from 1st to 15th + Total from 16th to end of month.



Returns should be signed by Head Postmaster and should ensure that the total of
e-schedules tallies with the e-Head office classified cash book before dispatch to
PAO.

Rule 49. Submission of Head Office Classified Cash Account to PAO
(a) The Head office classified Cash Account of the Head Office for the previous month
will be submitted by 5th of each month to the Postal Accounts Office. The entries to be
made against the several head in the monthly Head Office classified Cash Account will
be progressive totals on the last working day of the month under each Head of account.
(b) The Head Postmaster is required to personally check the final totals of the Head Office
classified Cash Book before and will be held responsible for the correctness of these
entries.

20

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 52. Delegation of Duty
The duty of checking the Cash Account and submitting it to the Postal Accounts Office,
may under the orders of the Head of circle, is delegated to the APM (Accounts). The DOP
Cash Balance Report including transit must be prepared by the Postmaster himself with
the support of APM (Accounts)/Accountant attached to Head Post Office.
Rule 54. Statement of Balances
(a) The Head Postmaster is responsible that the balances in cash and stock of postage and
other stamps at the close of the day are within the limits fixed by the competent authority.
He can keep cash in excess of the authorized maximum when the local Treasury/Bank is
closed for holidays or when the excess cash is required to meet actual liabilities or to
disburse pay at the end of a month, but in every such case the reason for keeping cash in
excess of the limit should be recorded in the Daily Transaction Report.
(b) The actual balances held in cash and stock of postage and other (non-postal) stamps
at the close of each day, together with authorized balances must be entered in a weekly
statement of balances in the prescribed form and submitted punctually on the 1st, 8th,
16th and 24th of every month to the SPO's or the SSPO's, but the Head Offices under the
administrative control of the Head of Circle should submit the statement of balances to
the circle office for scrutiny etc.
Rule 55. Supplementary Accounts for March


All transactions of the financial year under consideration have to be brought to
accounts in the same financial year. The Postmaster/DDO have to include all
transactions of all subordinate offices before the closure of March accounts at DDO
Level.



Before the closure of March Month, all reversals, transfer entries, modification etc.,
transaction inclusion be done in the system against 31st March and ensure
inclusion by that date.

Rule 56. Postmaster Duties Relating to Accounts


The Postmaster is personally responsible for the correctness of the returns
rendered by him/her to the Postal Accounts Office and for the punctuality of their
submission.

21

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material


FHB Vol - II

The duty of examining the S.O. transactions and the Branch Office transactions
must always be carried out by the Postmaster personally, unless this duty is duly
delegated to the Deputy or the Assistant Postmaster, as the case may be.

Rule 57. Verification of Balances and Examination of Accounts
1. Cash Balance: Every evening before the office is closed, the Head Postmaster
should count the cash in office and satisfy himself that the total of the amounts
agreed with DOP closing balance at foot of the Daily Transaction Report and cross
verify with the DOP closing balance as in Treasurers cash Book. The DOP cash
balance as ascertained from the e-treasurers' cash Book and that of e-DTR be cross
checked and validated with physical cash balance.
2. Disposal of Unused Loose Stamps: The following procedure should be observed
for the disposal of unused loose service postage stamps and stationery and
revenue stamps found on counters of Post Office or in letter boxes:
o

Such stamps and stationery will be kept out of the accounts of the Post office
but retained at the Post office till the end of the month following that in
which they were found.

o

If the owner submits his claim within this period and is able to establish his
claim the Post Office will return the stamps and stationery to him.

o

Where no claims are received by the post office within this period, or claims
made could not be established, the stamps and stationery will be taken to
the stock of such stamps and stationery.

3. Sum kept out of account: Every evening before the office is closed, the postmaster
shall cross verify the correctness of availability of physical cash with that of sum
kept out of treasury on T+1 day basis.
4. Indian Postal Orders: Every evening before the office is closed, the Head
Postmaster should refer to the e-stock register of IPO held unsold and satisfy
himself that the stock is correct.
5. Unpaid Articles in Deposit: Every evening, before the office is closed, the Head
Postmaster should calculate the postage due on the articles of the letter mail in
deposit and satisfy himself that the entries are correct and also the days realized

22

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

dues have been accounted correctly as 1201-postage realized in cash for ordinary
services.
6. Check of Savings Bank transaction: Each unit HO/SO/BO shall take a report of
transactions done in their SOL and compare with DTR & classified cash account
to ensure all transactions have been depicted in DTR and Classified cash account
correctly.
7. Check of Post office certificates.
8. Check of e-MOs issued and paid.
9. Check on Drawings from Bank and remittance to Bank.
10. Check on treasury Transactions.
11. Comparison of classified cash account with e-schedule of Postal Receipts.
12. Comparison of Classified cash Account figures with McCamish PLI/RPLI.
13. Comparison of value & service charges on sale & cancellation of railway ticket
through post office with DTR and Classified cash Account.
14. Comparison of CSC transactions.
15. Comparison of Western union Money transfer transactions.
16. Check of Treasurers cash book.
17. Miscellaneous Examination of Stock book of saleable Publications.
18. Account of postage with Postmen.
19. Comparison of e-schedule of payments against working expenses under major
Head 3201 and 2252 other than salaries, Capital outlay major Head 5201 and 4252.
20. Check on IPPB transactions.
21. Check on Remittance transactions other than cash & check remittances.
22. Check of transaction with RMS units.
23. Check of GST receipts and GST payments.
24. Check of pension schedules.

23

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 58. Correction of Errors


Transfer Entries: Transfer entries from one head of account to correct head of
account as an error of classification in the original accounts. Any transaction if not
posted to a correct head of account need to be posted to correct head of account.



Multiple Entries: Multiple entries as an accounting error as a result of application
issues, such entries need to be reversed by following the SOP issued by Postal
Directorate.



DDO Authorization: DDO is authorized to make such corrections to the extent of
his domain of accounts based on the request from sub ordinate units including his
unit along with proper explanation & entry in the error book maintained in the
office.



Timing: DDO shall ensure that such reversals or posting of document based on
the requirement be done on the current date and in no posting or reversal allowed
of prior period/date accounts would have already been submitted and finalized.
An e-report of reversals and correction of errors done by DDO be made available
to Circle postal accounts office for checks and balances.

Rule 59. Submission by Head Offices & Other Accounting Units


The verified returns with reference to e-schedules of receipts and payments under
various Head of accounts constituting the accounts bundle, for submission by
Head Offices to Circle Postal Accounts offices.



Wherever e-schedules available and accessible to PAOs, no separate hard copy of
the list/journal/schedule etc. be sent to Postal Accounts office. However,
supporting vouchers duly mentioned with Bill number/document number with
date be affixed on it be attached date wise/document no. wise/GL wise.



Third party applications like WUMT, CSC, etc. that e-schedule of receipts and
payments should be tallied with DTR of each day and also with that of classified
cash account by the dealing assistant.

24

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

CHAPTER V: RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE ACCOUNTS
Rule 60. Responsibility for Accounts
(a) The Head Record Officer (HRO) is personally responsible for all the monetary
transactions of the division and for the correctness of the accounts connected therewith.
He shall obtain cash from the designated DDO/Head Post office to the extent of
requirement and ensure that no money is kept in the office beyond the cash Imprest fixed
for his office. He is responsible for safe custody of cash and ensures that cash is kept in
safe custody along with joint custodian. The HRO shall obtain cheque through
application workflow process for payment to vendors or outsiders based on the sanction
issued by the competent authority.
(b) In every division there is an Accountant selected by Superintendent from among the
sorters, to assist the Head Record clerk in the purely clerical account work of the office
such as preparing bills, e-money orders, cash accounts and writing up the Cash Book,
cash abstract, classified cash account and reconciliation with e-schedules. But the HRO is
solely responsible that they are correctly and punctually prepared or rendered.
(c) All the contents of the HRO office safe are held in the joint custody of the Head record
Officer and the Accountant, each of whom is provided with a key of the safe. The
accountant is responsible for the safe custody during working hours of the contents of
the office safe. He is responsible for writing up the Cash Abstract correctly and is jointly
responsible with the HRO for the verification before the close of the office, of the cash
balance of the cash abstract with the cash and of the other articles, documents, or property
in the office safe, and for the safe custody of the cash etc., after the safe is locked up for
the day.
Rule 61. Cash Abstract
A Cash abstract (ACG-33) is kept by each Head Record and sub record office in which
the money transactions of the office itself.
Rule 62. Receipts
(a) The receipt and disposal of all miscellaneous sums received by the officials of the
Railway Mail Service from various sources should, as soon as the transactions take place,
be entered in a register Treasurer cash book (Form ACG.-40). At the close of each month

25

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

an extract from this register should be forwarded to the Superintendent of the Railway
Mail Service Division concerned for information.
(b) All miscellaneous sums received from the various sources should be paid into the
local Post Office through application workflow and a receipt obtained from the
Postmaster and acknowledged in the system.
Rule 63. Submission of Accounts to Postal Accounts Office
At the close of business each day the e-classified cash Book should be closed and every
month the figures in the classified Cash Book are tallied with corresponding e-schedule
total along with vouchers and bills submitted to Postal account office same as Submitted
by Head Offices & other accounting units monthly.

CHAPTER VI: STATUTORY TAXES
Rule 64. DDO Accountability
DDO (Drawing & Disbursing Officer), In case of Govt. Office or any officer designated as
such is accountable for TDS deduction on payment and credit to Govt. Account. The
concept of TDS envisages the principle of "pay as you earn."
Rule 65. Assessment and Recovery
Drawing and Disbursing officer including NCDDO is responsible for assessment,
recovery, filing returns etc. Salary is chargeable to Income tax on due or paid basis,
whichever is earlier.


Any arrears of salary paid in the previous year, if not taxed in any earlier previous
year, shall be taxable in the year of payment.

Rule 66. Deduction of Tax (Section 192)
Under section 192, the Drawing and disbursing officer is responsible to deduct income
tax at the rate applicable while making payment of salary during Financial Year under
consideration.


The DDO has to issue a certificate of the amount of tax so deducted to his
employees, in Form No. 16.
26

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material


FHB Vol - II

No TDS is to be deducted on disability Pension to ex-servicemen.

Rule 67. Classification of Income Tax Recovered
The various types under which Income tax is recovered out of postal business and
transactions are depicted below:
Tax Head

Description

TDS-Salary Income tax from salary-Collection including deductions
TDS-194C

Deduction of Income tax from contractors

TDS-194A

Deduction of Income Tax Interest payments other than securities

TDS-194H

Deduction of Income Tax from Commission, Brokerage

TDS-193

Deduction from Interest on Security

TDS-192

Deduction from Govt. Emp Other than Union Government employees

TDS-194 I

Deduction of Income Tax on rent

TDS-194EE

Deduction IT on withdrawal of NSS

Income Tax Surcharge
-

Income tax Health and Education Cess.

Rule 68. Employee Declaration
Salaried employee may furnish a statement in Form 12BB duly verified, giving details of
his other income or loss under the head house property or claims of deductions under
Chapter VIA, to his employer.
Rule 70. Collection and Classification
DDO/Postmaster shall ensure that the TDS so collected from salary and properly
classified to Major Head 0021 and tallies with the e-schedules under the relevant head of
account. File due returns 24Q on quarterly basis.

27

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 71 to 74. Filing of Income Tax Returns by DDO


24G & 24Q: TDS salary



26G & 26Q: Other than Salary

Rule 76. Goods and Service Tax (GST)
GST is an indirect tax used in India on the supply of Goods and Services.


Three different types of levies in GST:

Type of GST

Description

CGST

Central Good & service Tax (for central Govt.)

SGST/UTGST Supply made by a registered person within a State/U.T.
IGST

IGST is leviable on Inter-State supply of goods or services or both.
IGST is equivalent to sum total of CGST and SGST/UTGST

Rule 85. Place of Supply
GST is destination-based taxation or consumption-based taxation. By destination-based
tax it means that the revenue accrues to the place where the goods or services are
consumed.
Rule 86. Consumption Route
The consumption pattern for any goods or services follows a route:


B2B Supply



B2C Supply



Recipient of Service or Goods is the final consumer.



No credit is allowed to final consumer.

Rule 92. TDS on GST
TDS @ 2% (1% TDS on CGST & 1% on SGST) where the value of service or Goods exceed
Rs. 2.5 Lakhs. The provisions of TDS on GST are applicable from 1st Oct 2018.

28

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 94. Input Tax Credit (ITC)
Under Rule 42 of CGST Rules, it shall be the responsibility of the officer-in-charge of
Postal unit to avail the Input Tax credit.
Rule 100. Payment of Taxes


Every registered regular taxpayer under GST is required to compute his tax
liability on a monthly basis by setting off the Input Tax Credit (ITC) against the
Outward Tax Liability.



The deposit shall be made through any of the following modes:
1. Credit Card or debit card through the authorized bank.
2. NEFT and RTGS.
3. Over the counter (OTC).



Electronic Liability Ledger: The Electronic Ledger shows the total tax liability of
a registered person at any point of time.



Electronic Cash Ledger: It will display the total amount deposited by the taxpayer
towards discharge of his tax liability or interest or late fee or penalty any other
amounts.

Rule 101. Filing Returns of GST
GST returns has to be filed by all the DDOs and NCDDOs entities that are registered
under the GST system. The registered dealer if he sales, purchase, Output Goods and
services tax (on Sales) and input Tax Credit with GST paid on the purchase. The
Postmaster shall ensure that the CGST/SGST/UTGST/IGST collected and accounted for in
the books is only remitted duly tallying with Invoice value pertains to B2B and B2C.
Rule 103. Penalty for Late Filing of GST Returns
A penalty will be levied in case he/she fails to file the returns on time. This penalty is
called the late fee. The late fee is Rs. 100 for each day for each CGST and SGST. Thus, the
total fine amount will be Rs. 200 per day. The maximum amount of fine that can be levied
is Rs. 5,000. The taxpayer will also be required to pay an interest on amount on tax at the
rate of 18% p.a. in addition to the late fee.
29

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 104. Account and Records
As per the GST Act, every registered taxable person must maintain the accounts books
and records for at least 72 months. The period will be counted from the last date of filing
of annual return for that year.

CHAPTER VII: MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES
Rule 105. Refund of Postage, etc. to the Public
Any refunds of postage etc. shall be charged to the Head of account wherein
corresponding credits are charged. May sanction the refund of the face value of:


Unused but spoilt postage stamps, both ordinary and service, subject to a
reduction of 6.25%.



No claim to refund is considered in respect of any complete sheets of stamps.



Unused but spoilt Postal stationery subject to a reduction of 20%.



Refunds shall not be granted for unused and serviceable postage stamps.



Refund of the value of postage stamps found loose in letter boxes or at post office
counters.



Refund of postage on account of impressions of the franking machine made in
error after deduction of 5% face value by SSP.

30

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

CHAPTER VIII: PENSION PAYMENTS
Rule 115. Scope and Applicability
The rules in this Chapter shall regulate the procedure with regard to the payment at any
post office in India, of Postal service pensions payable in India out of the revenues of the
Department under CCS (Pension) Rules 2021.


Pension, whether due or to become due, is free from attachment from any court
until it has actually been paid as per the Pension Act.

Rule 116. Place of Payment
Service pensions shall be processed by Head Post Offices and paid at any Head or Sub
Post Office in India. Consequent on roll out of centralized application and disbursement
is through POSB, all processing and disbursement will happen at the DDO/Head Post
Office Level. In all cases, however, the first payment of pension shall be made at the
Head or Sub Post Office in the jurisdiction of which the pensioner has elected to receive
payment.


Provisional Pension, provisional Family pension and provisional Gratuity where
payable shall be drawn, by the head of office where the Government servant
served immediately prior to his retirement.



In case, service pension is disbursed through POSB account of the service
pensioner across any eligible post offices in India based on request of him/her, the
place where the POSB accounts stands will be the place of payment.



Pension cannot be paid in cash. Hence credit of service pension will be through
individual POSB account stands in the name preferably joint account with spouse.

Rule 119. Pension Payment Order (PPO)
Except payment of provisional pensions by Heads of Offices, payment of service pensions
can be made only upon valid e-PPO or hard copy of the PPO in the prescribed Form
issued by the Accounts officer of the CPAO to the Head Post Office or in the jurisdiction
of which payment is desired by the pensioner.

31

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Rule 120. Custody of PPOs
On receipt of PPO in a Head Post Office, Postmaster's half of the order shall be kept in
separate files, one for each class of pension (service pension / Family pension etc.)
prominently marking in red ink. These files may be kept in the personal custody of the
Postmaster in such a manner that pensioners shall not have access thereto.
Rule 121. Procedure on Receipt
On receipt of the PPO, the disbursing officer shall paste the documents on his half (or the
duly endorsed copy) of the Pension PPO. The pensioner's half of the order shall be made
over, under receipt, to the pensioner after proper identification when he appears to
receive his pension for the first time.
Rule 122. Exemption from Personal Appearance (Notation)
When a pensioner is specially exempted from personal appearance, the fact shall be noted
by the disbursing officer on his Pension Payment Order.
Rule 123. Renewal of PPO
Head Postmasters are authorized to renew Pension Payment Orders without reference to
the Postal Accounts Office in cases in which pensioner's half is lost, worn or torn, or
completely filled up. Old PPO shall be retained by the Postmaster for three years and
then destroyed.
Rule 125. Loss of PPO
If both halves of a PPO are reported lost in transit due to floods etc., before commencing
payment, the Directors / Dy. Director of Accounts (Postal)/GM (PAF) will issue a
duplicate PPO which would be prominently marked as "Duplicate - No payment to be
made against original PPO."
Rule 126. Commutation of Pension
PPO have the amount of payment of the commuted value of the pension and the reduced
amount of pension to be payable with effect from the date of commutation. The date of
payment of commuted value will be noted on both the halves of the PPO by the
disbursing officer.

32

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material


FHB Vol - II

Restoration of commuted value of Pension will be authorized by Head
Postmasters after 15 years from the date of payment.

Rule 128. Register of Pension Payment Order
The Postmaster will keep a register/e-register in Form No. Pension-2 of the PPO received
by him. When both portions are returned due to death or transfer or otherwise, date of
the renewed PPO or the date and cause of return should be entered in the black ink under
the Postmaster's initials. An intimation about the death of a pensioner should be recorded
by Postmaster.
Manner of Payment
Rule 132. Due Date
Pension fixed at monthly rates are payable monthly on or after the last working day of
the month except pension payment for the month of March which shall be paid on first
working day of April.
Rule 133. Payment of Claims
The disbursement of provisional pension drawn by the DDO/Head Post Office shall be
made by drawl of bills based on the sanction issued by the competent authority in the
same manner in which Pay and allowances are disbursed by him.
Rule 134. Exemption from Personal Appearance
A pensioner specially exempted by the orders of competent authority from personal
appearance, a female pensioner not accustomed to appear in public, or a pensioner who
is unable to appear in consequence of bodily illness or infirmity, may be received his or
her pension through a representative upon the production of a life certificate signed by
a responsible Government Officer or by some other well-known and trustworthy person.
Rule 135. Authorities for Life Certificate
A pensioner who produces a life certificate signed by any person specified hereunder is
exempted from personal appearance:


A Magistrate under the CrPC.



A Registrar or Sub-Registrar appointed under the Indian Registration Act.
33

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II



A Group A or B Government servant.



Sub-Inspector-in-charge of a police station.



A Postmaster, a Sub-Postmaster or an Inspector of Post Offices.



A pensioned officer who, before retirement, exercised the powers of a Magistrate.



A Block Development Officer, Munsif, Tahsildar or Naib Tahsildar.



A head of a Village Panchayat, Gram Panchayat.

Rule 136. Pensioners Non-Resident in India
A pensioner not resident in India may draw his pension in India, through a duly
authorized agent, possessing a legally valid power of attorney, who must produce a life
certificate on each occasion, unless the duly authorized agent has executed an indemnity
bond to refund overpayments in which case, he has to produce the life certificate at least
once a year.
Rule 137. Agents with Indemnity Bonds
A pensioner of any description resident in India is exempted from personal appearance
if he draws his pension through an agent who has executed a bond to refund
overpayments and produce at least once a year a life certificate signed by a person
authorized under Rule 135 to sign such certificates.
Rule 138. Validity of Agent Payment
The pension of a person drawing his pension through an authorized agent who has
executed a bond to refund overpayment, shall not be paid on account of a period of more
than a year after the date of the life certificate last received, and the disbursing officer
shall be on the watch for authentic information of the death of any such pensioner, an on
receipt thereof, shall promptly stop further payments.
Rule 139. Payment to Minors/Guardians
When a pensioner is a minor, or is for any other reason incapable of managing his own
affairs, and has not regularly appointed manager or guardian or when the guardian so
appointed dies or forfeits the position of a guardian payments may be made to the person,
who comes with the pensioner as the guardian for the first time, provided the same
34

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

person produces a certificate from the Collector of the District or the Deputy
Commissioners declaring him to the manager or guardian for the purpose of receiving,
on behalf of the pensioner, pension due to him.


This certificate shall be kept on record with the disburser's half of the PPO.

Forms of Pension Bills and Connected Certificates
Rule 141. Declaration of Marriage/Remarriage
A declaration shall be obtained half yearly from all recipients of family pension whose
pension is terminable on their marriage or remarriage. Every pension disbursing officer
shall submit to the Accounting Authority concerned a statement showing particular and
date of last payment of pensions in respect of the cases of failure to furnish the above
declaration in the month of January and July.
Rule 142. Payment of Family Pension on Death
A disbursing officer, will in case of death of pensioner governed by Rule 50 of CCS
(Pension) Rules 2021, start paying family pension to the widow/widower on receipt of
death certificate of the pensioner and the Application in Form-10. For the grant of family
pension to her/him, and he will also send an intimation in this regard to the Postal
Accounts Office.
Rule 143. Checks by Disbursing Officer
A pensioner drawing pension for the first time shall be required to produce his personal
copy of PPO to the Head Postmaster and his signature or thumb / great toe impression
on the bill shall be compared with the specimen signature or thumb / great toe impression
received with the PPO and a note to this effect shall be recorded on the disburser's half
of the order.


Consequent on the disbursement of pension through POSB, this requirement is
not in vogue as payment will be done through POSB based on the request and data
furnished by the service pensioner.

Rule 144. Precautions for Agent Payments
When a pensioner draws his pension through another person, the disbursing officer must
take special precautions against fraudulent presentation of claims and satisfy himself of
35

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

the existence of the pensioner and of the identity of the payee before any payment is
ordered and if he feels any suspicion, shall refer it to the pensioner before payment.
Rule 146. Record of Payment
Every payment of pension including Family pension through POSB or any other mode
authorized by D-G. The Pension Disbursing Authority shall process pension through
system and ensure the availability of Schedules/e-schedules tallied with the actual
amount of disbursement charged in the DTR.
Gratuities
Rule 148. Payment of Gratuity
A gratuity is paid in a single sum, and not by instalments on an authority received from
the concerned Postal Accounts. Payment can be claimed on the letter of authority itself,
and no separate bill is necessary.
Rule 149. Tax Exemption
Under the Section 10(10) of the Indian IT Act, 1961 has been exempted from income-tax
of the death-cum-retirement gratuity paid under the CCS (Pension) Rules 2021 of the
Central Government or same state Govt.
Rule 150. Interest on Delayed Gratuity
In case of delay in payment of gratuities beyond 3 months of the date they become due
on account of administrative lapse or for reasons beyond the control of the Pensioner
concerned, Interest shall be paid to Pensioner.
Rule 151. Provisional Gratuity
Provisional gratuity sanctioned by a competent authority in respect of a retired
Government Servant shall be drawn separately by the Head Post Office in which he last
served.

36

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Periodical Identification of Pensioners
Rule 152. Life Certificate
The pensioners/family pensioners would be required to furnish a Life Certificate in
November each year to pension disbursing authority.


The Pensioners/Family pensioners aged 80 years and above may submit their Life
certificate w.e.f. 1st October of each year which would be valid till 30th
November.



Digital Life Certificate (DLC) may be produced by Pensioners to pension
disbursing authority. The Pension disbursing authorities are authorized to accept
Life certificate through Jeevan Pramaan portal.

Undrawn Pension and Arrears
Rule 153. Lapse of Pension
A pension remaining undrawn for more than one year shall cease to be payable by the
Disbursing Officers. If the pensioner afterwards appears, or a claim is presented on his
behalf, the Disbursing Officer may make the payment, but the arrears cannot be paid
without the previous sanction of the authority by whom the pension was sanctioned to
be obtained through the Head of Postal Accounts office:
(a) If the arrears relate to a pension to be paid for the first time.
(b) If the amount in arrears exceeds Rs. 50,000.
If a service pension remains undrawn for three years, it cannot be paid without the
authority of the PAO or CCA and concerned. A gratuity payment order shall remain in
force for one year only, if payment has not been made on it within a year of its issue. The
void order shall be returned to the PAO or CCA.
Rule 154. Death of Pensioner (Arrears)
The payment of arrears of pension due in respect of a deceased pensioner shall be
regulated by the following rules:
(a) Pension can be drawn for the day of pensioner's death, the hour at which death takes
place has no effect on the claim.
37

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

(b) In the death of a pensioner, payment of any arrears actually due may be made to his
heirs, provided that they apply within one year of his death; they cannot be paid
thereafter without the sanction of the competent authority to be obtained through the
Accounting Authority concerned.
Provided that:
1. If the gross amount of arrears does not exceed Rs. 50,000 and the case represents
no peculiar feature the accounting authority concerned may authorize the
payment on his own authority.
2. If the gross amount of arrears exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 2,50,000
under the orders of the Head of the Department, upon production of Indemnity
Bond in form TR-14 duly stamped, for the gross amount due for payment, with
such sureties as may be deemed necessary.
3. Normally there should be two sureties, both of known financial stability, if the
gross amount of claim is less than Rs. 75,000 in which case the authority accepting
indemnity bond in form TR-14 for and on behalf of President of India should
decide on the merit of such case whether to accept only one surety instead of two.
4. Where the amount of arrears exceeds Rupees 2,50,000, payments shall be
authorized to be made only to the persons producing the legal authority.
(c) After payment of the arrears of pension, both portions of the PPO shall be returned to
the Accounting Authority concerned, with a report of the date of the death of the
pensioner.
Rule 155. Nominations
The payment of arrears of Pensions will be made to the nominees of the deceased
pensioners in accordance to the Payment of Arrears of Pension (Nomination) Rules,
1983.
(a) Every employee has to submit to the Head of the office of the Department, from where
he/she is retiring, a nomination in Form A in triplicate within three months before or
after the date of retirement.
(b) Within thirty days of the receipt of the nominations the Head of the office shall verify
and return to the Pensioner the duplicate copy of the nomination duly attested by him.
38

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

The triplicate copy duly accepted shall be sent to the Accounts Officer, who shall pass it
on to the Pension Disbursing Authority along with the PPO.
(c) A notice of modification of nomination including cases where a nominee predeceases
the pensioner shall be submitted to the Pension Disbursing Authority.
Rule 156. Reports to the Postal Accounts Office
A six-monthly statement of cases of failure to draw pensions shall be prepared by the
Head Postmasters separately in respect of (1) the pension payment orders issued by the
Postal Accounts Offices and (2) the pension payment orders issued by the Circle Telecom
Accountants. Accountant concerned so as to reach them by the 10th of June and the 10th
of December.
Rule 157. Cessation of Pension
When pension ceases to be payable during the life-time of a pensioner, both portions of
Pension Payment Order shall be returned by the Postmaster to the Postal Accounts Office
or Circle Telecom Accounts office concerned after making the last payment and with a
note recording the reasons for the cessation of the pension.
Rule 158. Transfers of Pension
The transfer of payment of pension from one Post Office to another within the jurisdiction
of the same Postal Accounts Office may be authorized by the Head Postmaster. The Head
Postmaster sanctioning the transfer of payment of pensions should record in the
endorsement to Postal Account Office a certificate to the effect that a note has been made
in the Register of e-Pension payment order/PPO maintained in his office.


The Head Postmaster of the office to which the pension papers have been
transferred while acknowledging receipt of the transferred pension papers to the
Head Postmaster sanctioning the transfer will, in his endorsement of the same to
the Postal Accounts Office specify the date from which he has to commence
pension payment and the case mark of transferring office.



In case of transfer of payment of pensions from one Post Office to another within
the jurisdiction of another Postal Accounts Office the Postmaster of the Head
Office from which the payment is transferred should return both the halves of

39

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Pension payment Order to the Director of Accounts Postal who issued the original
order, for necessary action.
Rule 159. Accounts
Payment on account of pensions and commuted value of pensions made by Head Post
Offices will be entered in the e-schedules of pension payments are recorded in separate
schedules. The schedules of pension payments should be preserved for ten years.
Rule 160. Classification
Payments made by the Pension disbursing authority/DDO should be charged and
classified 15-digit Head (10-digit GL code) Heads of accounts.
Rule 162. Death and Excess Credits
In case it is found that the pensioner has expired, the date of death will be got ascertained
and noted in the P.P.O. under the initials of the Postmaster / Sub Postmaster and further
credit of the pension to the S.B. account will be stopped.


In case of excess or wrong credit of pension because of the death of the pensioner,
the excess amount credited will be withdrawn by the postmaster from the S.B.
account of the pensioner under his own signature and credited to the unclassified
Receipts with suitable remarks.



A remark to the effect will also be made in the PPO.



In case the balance left in the account is so small that full recovery is not possible,
the amount of over-payment should be intimated to the Director of Accounts
(Postal).

Rule 165. Transfer - POSB Credits
At Present scenario pension credit any POSB account which stands any post office in all
over India.

40

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Family Pension
Rule 166. Documents Required
The amount of family pension payable to the widow / widower of the deceased pensioner
is also given in the pension payment order. When she/he becomes entitled to receive
family pensions, the Head Postmaster will obtain the following documents from the
widow/widower who will also be asked to open a S.B. pension Account in her/his name.


Death certificate of pensioner.



Application for the family pension in the form at Annexure D.



A copy of the photograph.



A letter of authority and undertaking (Annexure A).

Rule 167. Authorization of Family Pension
On receipt of the above documents the Head Postmaster will authorise the concerned
post office to start paying family pension to the widow / widower as mentioned in the
PPO after necessary scrutiny and verification of the documents. The Head Postmaster
will also send intimation in this regard to the Director / Dy. Director of Accounts (Postal)
in the form at Annexure E.


The declaration in the form at Annexure F whose family pension is terminable on
marriage / remarriage will be obtained from the pensioner once a year in
December except who giving an undertaking that the pension would be drawn
until remarriage which would be reported promptly to the Postmaster.

CHAPTER IX: ACCOUNTS OF OTHER UNITS
Rule 168. Non-Cheque Drawing DDOs (NCDDO)
The units called Non-Cheque Drawing and Disbursing (NCDDO) units like MMS, COs,
ROs, Postal Directorate, PA wing, PLI Directorate, BD Directorate, Centre for
excellence Postal Technology, Postal Stores Depot, Postal training centers, Head
Record Offices, etc. These units obtain funds (cash & cheque) through workflow in the
application and show such remittances under the major Head 8782 RSAO.
41

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

CHAPTER X: MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS
Rule 169. Change in Status of a Post Office
(a) HO to SO (b) SO to HO (c) BO to SO (d) Closing / Relocation of Offices.


The competent authority issues suitable administrative orders and based on it a
Service desk ticket will be raised under CSI for the changes required.



This is a common template which shares data for creation of Facility ID, Profit/Cost
Centre, Plant/Storage, office specific data for maintaining at F&A and others.



The Balance from the old PC to new PC is transferred as per the procedure.



SOL transfer Office Accounts pending operations report generated by the CPC.

Rule 171. Railway Mail Service Vans
Payment of haulage, weighment, interest charges and subsidies to Railway. The Capital
cost of the Railway Mail Service Vans maintained in register of Railway Vans in Form
A.C.G.-69.
There are four types of Mail vans in which we carry mails:
Type of Mail Utilized of Accommodation of Payment to be made for no. of
vans

mail van

berths

S.W- Full Van

More than 3/4 of the coach

72 berths

S.T- Van

More than 1/2 up to 3/4

54 berths

S.H- Half Van

More than 1/4 up to 1/2

36 berths

S.Q- 1/4 of a 1/4 of the coach or less

18 berths

Van
Method of payment of haulage charges: The billing will be done on monthly basis. The
bills by the 10th of the following month to which the bills pertain.

42

www.dakguru.com

Dak Guru Study Material

FHB Vol - II

Haulage Charges (2023-24 Rates):
Distance Slab

Charges for 2023-24

0-500 kms

Rs. 1.15 per berth per km

501-1000 kms

Rs. 0.73 per berth per KM (Subject to minimum of Rs.
575/km/berth)

1001

kms

more

and Rs. 0.61 per berth per KM (Subject to minimum of Rs.
730/km/berth)

List of Forms
Form No. Description of Form
ACG-2

E-Treasurer Cash book

ACG-4

Head office classified Cash Book

ACG-5

Post Office Cash Account

ACG-28

Register of cheques received and cleared

ACG-40

e-classified cash Book

ACG-45

Unpaid postal abstract Register

ACG-67

e-Money Receipt

ACG-33

Cash Abstract at RMS offices

43

www.dakguru.com

